..,. I " I ' .. ACTION:EUR IlfFO: s u 0 A-B A-0. A-D SA SPA Ulf O  P!M-X-M ... .11 DEPART)lENT OF ST INCOMING TELEGRAM 896䖄 Jlo paraphrase neceasar1. INFORMATION COPY ACTION MUST BE ENDORSED ON ACTION COPY Moscov v1a War Seereta.rJ ot State, Washington. . 511. Februar,. 22, 9 p . m. - Datetl Febru&rJ 22, 1946 p.m. . . ­ \}) . Anaver to Dept• s 284, Feb 3 1nvolv.,3 questions 80 intricate, so delicate, so strango t•J our tol"m o( thought, and so important to o.n&lJsis or our inter­ national environment that I cannot comp-i10ss ansveJ."8 into single br䖆er message vlthout Jleldjng to vhat I feel vould b"e d&ngol"ous degree or over .. :J1mp11t1cation. I hope,. therefore 11, Dept v111 bear with me. 1r I submit 1n answer to 'this question tive parts11 su·.>jt>ots or which vill be rOU$hlJ as follows: (one) <sic· reaturos or post-var Soviet outlook. (Tvo) Background or this outlook. (Three) Its projection in practical policv on ott1c1al level. (Four) Its projoct1on on unotticial level. (Five) Prar.t1oal,dedt;ict.1ons troa etcs.ndpo1nt ot US policy. I apologize in advance tor this burdoning o" telegraphic chanel; but questions involved aro aံ such Ul'gent importance, pa.rtjcularly 1n viev ot recen䖈 events, that our ansYero to th့း, if thsy deaerv' atten­ tion at &11, seem to me to deserve it at once. 䖅\!ERE POLL0\15 PART ONE: BASIC f'F..ATURES OF POST WAR 50\jET OUTL·)OK, AS PU'l FORWARD BY OFFICIAL PROPAGANDA MA1)!1IlfE, ARE AS FOLLOWS: (A) USSR still lives in o.ntagonistic 11cap11.䖉11at encirclement" v1th vhich in the long rWl there ci.\1 bo no permanent peacetul coex13tence. As stated by Stalin 1n 1927 to a delegation or .Amorican \tol"ke1·;. 䖃 IUI IH:lrll:I MOl&t nrm 11:\.u.MlrlU &O. 11 IU. Sec. Jal -.d: 5(IJ • l'Q Dept. Qf &late .... A119- 10. 1m - .. - "In couroo -2- U5.u ... Fဲhrum•J 22,, 9 p.m. from Nuooov via War "In oourae or rurthor <.tovnlo).Wlent: or 1nterno.t1onal rovolutj.on th9r1䕿 vlll emnrge two r.11Jnter" of" vorld . algn.1f1canee: a so,.,lo.li䖁t r.ဴc.te1•, dro.ving to itself the count.-leo \IJ1:leh teml t;own.r<l eoe1al1nm, and a CR.Pi tali pt. .,ent4"r, rll'&VinB to i t䕺lr the oouotriea tbnt 1neJ.1ne tmro1•<l cap1 taliem. BattlA betveen thl'ae tvo cent9.t-B fot' coun.'1nd "r vo1•ld noon017 v111 deoide rate or ေo.:pl tal䕾.RDI oud or c0111Un1or.a 1n entire vorld." (B) CnpJ.tn!.1et ဳ•orl•l is beoet v!th 1nt-䕼rnal con­ tlicte, inherent tn nnt;uro or cap1t.ol.iat aoa1ety. ihese conrlicts nrȭ lunoluble by rneane of pencetul. compromise. Ort䖀ntoot of them 1a that between B:nglanll and us. __.-.- (C) Internal confl1ota or anp1tal.1am lnevltablJ generate vat's. wa䕻o thue generated ma:y be of tvo ldndas .1ntra-ca:p1t nl1et vare betvoen tvo cnp1tallet 'etatea,; eDd vars of intervention againot eoolaliet world. smart cnpit.alleta vainly aeeklog eeoape tt-oau 1.Dner oonfilcta of' cap1W1am, 1noJ.lue tovo.rd latter. (D) Int(l'l'VE"nt:ton 4£R.inat US.Sr.,. vhlle it vould be dieaatrou.a to thoon vho undertook 1.t, vould cause reneved del&J" in ppogreoo of' Soviet aoo1al1sm and mu.at therefore be ro1'ostalled at all oosta. (B) Con1"11cte betvoen cap1tal1ot atates, though 11.koviae fraught· v1th danger ror USSR, neYorthelesa hold out great i:osnlb1llt1oo for o.dvanoe1Mnt or aoo1al.1st cause, pn.rtlculnrl:r 1t USR relDGJ.ne 1111tnr11J' .. _...:P-.o_䖂r .fll , 1deolc.gica.l.ly 1t1011011th1c and falthruJ. to its preeent brilltar.t 1'9adersh1p. (F) It must. be born䕽 ln mind that copitallot world la not all btld. Iu tidd1t1on to hopeleaal7 reactionary and bo1.D'geo1a elemento, it 1nclwlea (one) oerta1n vholly enlightened o.nd pouitlvဵ olementa united in acceptable coam1at1c pa.rt1oo cmd ( 'L"'Wo) certain 0th.er elements (nov described for liact1cal rea3on3· as progressive oူ •cusrn1 __ & 0. I 11$J, s.c. JID _. r.m - "" democratic) Wftlf -3- #511, l'eb1"UAl7·22, 9 p.11. t'rom Moaoov via War demoorat1o) vhoaa reaotion.a, aep1rat1one and aot1vtt1ee happen to be "objectively" favorable to interests or USSR. Tbeae laat JDUat be enooll'aged and utilized tor Soviet purpaaea. (G) Amons negative elemeuta ot bourgeoia-oapitaliet eooletJ', moat da.Dgeroua ot all are those whom Len1.n called talee ti-1enda or the people, namely moderate­ aoo1al1at or eoo1al-demoarat1o leaders (in other vorda, non-oomanmiat lett-ving). Theae &l'e more dangeroua than out-and-out reaot1onar1ea, tor latter at leaat ma.rob under their true colors, 'Vherea• moderate lett­ ving lead.era oon1'U.8e people bJ employ1ns: devioea or eoo1al1am to eerve 1ntel"eata or reaotion&rJ capital. So muob tor prmnlaea. To what deduationa do the7 . lead tram atandpaint ot soviet pol1oJ'? To tollov1ns1 (A) Bverything must be done to advance relative atrengtb ot USSR aa tnotor 1n international sooiety. Couveraely, no opportun1cy must be missed to reduce strength and tnnuenco, colleot1velJ' aa vell aa 1nd1v14uall7, ot cap1t:.al11t povera. (B) SoT1et ettorta, and those ot Ruae1a11 friend• abroad, 11U.Bt be d.ireoted toward deepeniDg and explo1t1Dg ot d1tterenoe11 and oonfi1ote betveen oapltali•t povel'e. It th.e•a eventually d£epen into an "1mper1al1et" var, this val' muat be turned into revolutionary upheavals v1tb1n the varioue capltal.1at oountriea. (C) 111>emorat10 .. progree11lva" elements abroad are to be utilized to 1l18lt1mum to brlng pressure to bear on oap1te.11et governiaenta along 11nea &gr'eeable to Soviet 1ntereeta. (Dl Relentleea battle mu.at be vaged against sooialiat and aocial-d.aaocrat1o leaders abroad. PART 'lVO &HSMI BFIRM'" -Ji- #511, Pebru&l'J' 22, 9 p.11. from Moeoov Yi& Val" P.AltT TW01 BAC!:OROUID OP OUTLOOK Bet'ore examining ram1t1cn.t1ona ot th1e p&J'ty line 1n praot1oe there are certain aapeote or it to vhieh I v1eh to drav attention. F1rat., 1t doee not repi-eeent natural outlook of . Ru11s1an people. Latter are, by and large, friendly to oute1de vorld., eager tor exper1enoe or it, eager to 11eaeure against it ta.lente thoy are oonacioua ot poaaea111Dg, eager above all to live 1D peaoe and enjoy truite of their ovn labor. Po.rt䕷 11.De onl7 represents thesis vb1ch ott!oial propaganda machine puta forward vitb great llk.111 and peraiatenoe to a public often remarkably reeiatant in the stronghold ot 1te inermost thougbta. But partJ' line 1a b1Dd1Dg tor outlook and oonduct or people vbo make up apparatus ot pover--­ pa.rty, eeoret Pol1oe and govermaent---and it la ez­ olua1vel.7 v1th these that ve have to deal. - Seoon4, pleaee note that prem.ieea on vhich th1e pa:rey line 111 baee4 are to't' moat part a1.mpl7 not true. Experience ha ahovn that peacetul and mutually profitable coexistence ot oap1tal.1at and aoo1al1at atatea ia entirely poaa1bla. Baalo 1ntei-nal oonn1ota 1n advanced countries &r$ no longer pr1mal'117 those ar1a1Dg out or capitalist ovn.erahip ot aeane of Pl'OclUotlon, but are ones arising f'rom advanoed urbaniam and 1n4uatr1al1am aa suoh, Vh1ch Ruaaia ha thuo tar ben ep&:red not b:y aoo1al1am but only b7 her ovn baokvardnesa. Internal r1val.r1ea or oap1tal1111 do not alva:ys generate vars; and not all vara are attributable to tbia oauae. To speak or poee1b111१ ot intervention againat USSR tod&J', after e11m1M.tlon of OoJ"IB&D:J and Japan and arter example ot recent VB.I', le llheereat noneenae. If not ;o•oked b7 foroee ot 1ntoleronoe and aubvere1on capitalist" vorl4 ot tod&'J' is quite capable ot living at peaoe vith iteelt and vlth Rueela. Plna117, no sane person ha11 reaaoa to doubt e1noer1tJ or moderate eoc1&11at leaders 1n veetern oowitrlea. nor ls 1t tair to deDJ euoceea or their ettorta to :llprove oond.1t1one tor vork1ng Population llhenever䕸 aa 1n Soaud1nav1a, they t-·1 , .... ,.£, -- - - • • . . &OlGl ... • : • • ··c.c. ီ a:nd £0. Uv--·· ; 10 1'171 ·Z··· ,.'>l1• • I ..,, YQ .... • .. _.. t:rȬI. ' -" •f(ု-- <r Hllȫ :>:-•,,/&.:. LT #C.. f .. - ·• have been =·· .. s- 151, Februar1 22, 9 p.a. from lloaoow via War ban been g1Ten chance to shaw wbat they could do. hl.aene11 ot theae preld.aea, eve17 one ot whiob. pre-datea recent nr, wu aapl.J demcmatrated b7 that conruct 1taelt. Anglo-A.mrican ditference1 did not turn out to be •Jor dltterencea ot .. at.ern world. Capitalist countriea, ottM!lr than those ot Az:la, 11bowed no di11po1ition to aoln their dittennoe11 b7 jolnlq S.U cruade aaainst. mSR. Instead ot imperialst nr t\lJ"Jl!.q into ciril nra and. revolution, USR t'ound it•l.t obllpd. to tigbt aide b7 aide with capitalist po91r1 for an a1'owd oomunit1 or ai•. NeTerthelea1, all theu the1ea, hManr baael111 and dieprann, are being boldl.7 put ronrard ap.1D toda7. Wbat doea th11 indicate? It 1rd1catea that Smet part.7 line 111 not baaed on aey objective anal.1'8111 ot situation be7ond Ruaaia1a borders; that it has, 1Dleed, little to do with conclitions outside or Ruasi&J that it ar1ees minl.7 tro• basic inner-Ruaa1an necea!litiea which existed betore recent nr and exist tcda7. At bottom or ltrellin1 a neurotic rlew ot world attairs is traditional and 1nrt1net1Ye Russian sense or insecurity. Originally, this was in.HC'UJ"ity ot a peacetul agricultural people t?"1ng to live on vast erpoaed plain in neighborhood. ot fierce nomdic people a. To thia na added, as Ruaaia c.._ into eontaat with econollica.lly advance6 west, tear ot 110H co.tent mare powrtul, more highly organized l!locieties in that area. But thia latter t)19 ot ineecur1t7 was one which atnlotttd rather Russian rulera than Ru11s1an people J tor Ruaian rulertl havo invarimly sensed that their rule was relatively archaic in tor•, tragtle and arti­ ficial in its ps7chologioal tmmdation, unable to stand compariaon or contact with political ayst.e• ot western countrie1. For this reaaon the7 have aln,. teared tare1gn penetration, teared dJ.reat contuct bet .. n wet.ern world and their on, teared what would happen ll' Ruaaiane learned truth about world without or lt toreignera learned truth about world within. And they have learned ... IRUSSIAU l..Q. 1 IU2. S.C. >.Tl cmd 5(D) CS CID Po?t. d Slow ....,, AUQ. LO. Lm ,., Z ICAU DoM/J •II ·J]- lr. a. • ---· to aeek .. 6.. 1511, PebrUDl'y 22, 9 p.m. :from Moacov via War to seek •eeurity on17 in patient but deadly stt-ugsle tor total destruction of rival pover, never 1n OOIUP&cts o.nd o ompl'omiee a v1 th 1 t . It vas no coincidence that Ne.r:tiom,, which had smouldered ineffectively for half a century in Wostern Europe, caught hold and blnzed for ti.rat time in Russia. OnlJ in thio land vh1ch had never knotm a friendly neighbor or indeed any tolorant equJ.librium ot sopo.rate paveru, either inta:rnl or international, could a doctrine thrive vhicb vieved economic con.tlicts or soc1e1;J' aa insoluble by peecetul. means. Arter estab­ liabmftnt ot Bolshevist regJmo, MnJtxist doEPJ!&, reuderod even more t䕵ucul.ent and 1ntole䕶&nt bJ L&n.1n1a inte䕴­ pretat1on, became a portect vob1cle tor senာo or in­ aecuri ty v1th vhlch Bolehev1.k31 even core than previouo Rusaian rulera, vere oftlictad. In th.ta dogmc., vith its baaic alt:ru1mn or purpose, they found just1t1oat1on ror their 1.nst1nct1ve rear of outside vorိd. for the d1otatorab1p v1thout vhich they did not knov hov to i'll.e, tor erueltiea they did not dare not to infliot. for eaor1t1cea they felt bound to dAma.nd. In tho name of M&Mtiem theJ' aacr1f 1cod evory sinele ethical value in tbeil' methods and tactics. Today they cannot d1spenee vlth it. It ia fia leaf of their moral and 1ntelleotual raspoctab111ty. Without it they llould stand betoro hiatol'J', at beat,, ns only the last of that long nucceosion or cruel ond wnstatul Rusa1on :rulers vho have relentlessly !"orcod countrJ' on to ever nev heights of nallitary pov&r in order to guarantee oxternal aec०1 qr ot their 1nte::.1nn.llJ· veak regimes. 'lh13 is vhJ' 5ov1et purposes muot nlvayn be solemnly clothed in trappiDSe ot Mm-.xlsm,, JU1d vhy no one should underrate 1.mportanoe of dogD".a in Soviet 4ffa1rs. Th11u Soviet leaders are d.J'ivan necass1t1os of their ovn past ond present poa1t1on to put tcr11ard a dog:na vh1ch (•) outside vorld aa evil, hoetile and menacing, but ne bearing v1th1n 1teelf germs or croep1ng disease nnd destined to be vracked v1th srov1ng 1nterne.1 convulaiono until it 1s given tine.1 coup de grace by rioing pover or aoolallam and yields to nov and hotter vo:rld. Thia WU! IECUalnD ·--- E.O. 115.52. Sic. XD md 5(DI C1 CIQ D9pt. al SlaN ...... Ai.19- 10. 117'1 Ir .t,r: __ , MAU X .. a ·II.,").- thesis ·- SBSR&I -7- #511, February 22, 9 p.m. from Moecov via War thes1o provide• Just1f1cat1on ror that increase or m111tarJ' and police po䕮er or Russian etate. tor tbat isolation or Russian population from. outside vorld. and tor that fluid and constant pressure to extend 1111te or Ruaeian police pover vhich are together the natul"al and 1nst1nct1ve urges or Russian rulers. Baa1call.J' th!a la onl.7 the atea(ly advance or uneaa1 Jtuaa1an nationalism. a centuries old movement 1n vhich con­ ceptionn or ottenae and defense are 1D8%tr1cably oon­ tuaed. But in nev guloe or international Jlarxiam. vitb its hone䕱ed promlaen t.o a deeperate and var tol'D out•ide vorld, It la more dangerous and 1ne1d1oua than ever betor0. It ahould not be thought Crom above that Soviet partJ' line la aecesu&-rllJ' d.111ingenuou11 and 1na1Dcere OD part of all thoae llho put it forward ll8DJ' Of them are too ignorant or outside vorld and mentallJ' too dependent to queation (•) self-b.J1>not1em, and vbo h&n no d1ff1oult,. making themselves believe vbat theJ" ft.n4 it oomtortlng And convnnient to believe. Pin.ally ve baYe tho unsolved llJ'Stery as to vho, tr &IQ"One, 1D thie great lond aotually rE!ceivea accurate and unbiased 1nt'ormat1on about out111de vorld䕯 In atmosphere or oriental aecretlv䕳ne1s aud conap1racy vh.t.oh pervad.ea this gov䕲rnment, poaslbilltiea ror diatoॡtlng or Poisoning eourceo and currente or information are 1rd'1n1 te. The very d1oreapeo t or Rueaiane tor objective trutb---!ndeed, their d1abel1et 1o its exietenoe--­ leada them to V149V All stated rn.cta aa 1Detrumente tor turtherance or one ul t;orior purpose or another. Dlere la good reason to auapnct that th1a govermaent 1• actually a oonapiracy v1th1n a conap1.rao7; २d_IJQr OM . ,!.II reluoय़ॠ- to_belle.ve .. 䕭t .䕰.tal.1n h1maelt cea.e.1.na 9t"J4: _lॢ&ll-?bJe!=ॣ।Y.!...P.1ct॥JL.O.f put11de var14. llere there i• ample acope tor the 't7Jfe or eubtle 1.ntripe at vhioh Ruasiane ai•e ps8t masters. Inabili tJ" or f'oreJ.gn governments to place t.beir aase aqua.rel)" before Rueei&n Policy makera---extont to vhich th•T are delivered up 1n their relationa vith Russia to good graoes ot ob•oure and unknOVD advlaero vbom tb.e7 never aee &Dd canot 1.n1"1.uence---th1a to 1lI1' mind ls most d1equ1et1ng teature or d1plomao:r 1D Hoacov, and one vhioh western atate .. n vou1d do vell to keop in m.1nd 1r they would underataD4 nature or d1tt1cult1eu encountered here. DECUSlf IED PART DR.EB: p, =; i:--:' ': . • : . t '. ! t . &SIU! -8- 1511. FebါJ' 22, 9 p.11. trom J.toocov Via War PART mms PROJBCTIOH Oi.' SOVIET OUfLOQE Il PRACTICAL POLICY OB OF'Ji'ICIAL n䕤 Ve have nov aeon nat\l'e .Cl'.d background ot Soviet program. Wh.o.t ma:r vo expect b: vay of !ta praotlcal 1.mplementatlon? Soviet Policy, as Departrnnt implies 1n its quer1 under reference, la conducted JD tvo planes: (one) ottlaial plane ropresented by cctionn undertaken otticl&.lly in name ot Soviet OoverDJDent; .\nd ( tvo) aubterJtenean plane of actions undertaken by cgenc1ea tor \lh1ch Soviet Government does not admit respon11b1lltJ'. Polle,- prcnulgated on both :>laneo ¥111 be cal­ oulated to serve baelc policies (A) to (D) outlined in part one . Act1ona taken on dJft'erent planes v1ll dltte䕨 conelderabl7, but v111 401ota.1l into each other in JJUl'Po&e, t1JD1ng ond effect. on ottlcial plane ve must lcok fL䕥 tollovlng: (A) Internal policy dovoted to 䕪nci.:aeing in evory vo.䕣 atrerurth and prestigo of Sov1ot !lt&t<\1 intensive 11.!litar,--lndustrillizotion; maxmLD devol•l)ment ot armd roroas: great dioploys to im:nprnsa ol·.tsidore; continued aecretivenons about internal mnttora, designed to conceal weolcneesea and to k䕬ep ·lpponents in dark. (B) Wharevor 1t ls considered timely n d prom1a,.ng, efforts v1ll be made to advance official 11䕧lts of Soviet power. For tho l!lomont, these e:rtort; a.re restricted to certo1n neighboring points coL䕫o1ved of" here ao being ot 1Ded1ate ntrateg1o necessity, such as llorthern Iran, Tl.trkoy, posalbJ.7 Bornholm. novover, other Pointe may a.t ony ti.ae come into quau\·Lon, it and ae ooncealed soviet political po䕦er is '䕩tended to nev areae. Thus a "f'riendly" Persian Oove1tnant might be asked to grant Rusala a port on Persian (•ult. Should Spain tall under oomuniet cont1•ol, question ot Soviet 8118•1 &.&IUD ·- Ȫ 1111. .. :Im .. ICDt Ir • ""' .. .. ... ... .. "" .. 4f1J.r_.._. a <L·(J· ,2- s bose at 8B8IUI! -9• 1511, Pebl'UBl'J' 2䕖, 9 p.m. trom Moacov via Var baae at Olbralta.I' Str:iolt might be activated. But· such claims vlll appear ou·ott1o1al level only vhen unotf1c1al preparation ls oomplute. (C) Ruesiana v䕙䕚l participate of䕠1e1all䕡 in 1nternat1onal organizations vhere tboy see oppartunitJ' ot u:tending soviet pover or ot 1Dh1b1 tins or diluting paver ot other•. M•>ncov aees 1n ono not the meohaD.1sm tor a permanent and e1;able vorld aocioty tounded on mutual interest anc' alms or all nations, but an arena 1n vbicb a1ma just. mentioned oan be favorably pursued, Aa long as U!IO 1䕕 considered here to serve thie purpose, Soviets vill rernln with it. ·But it &t GJl1' tir.i䕘 they come to conolue!.o䕢'l that it is serving to embo:rase or truatrate the! l' c 1.ma tor power expannion and if they _ eee better prcspecto f"or 䕝suit or these al.ms along other lines, t:heJ v111 not hesitate to abandon lJBO, 'l!hie voul4 1rt1'1J', \ iovever, that the1 䕓e 1 t themae l vea atrons enouza, to :!pl1t unity ot othat• nation.a bJ' their v1thdraval, to ran\o:r 01'0 1nettectlve aa a threat to their a1ms or eeou··ity, and to replace 1t v1th an inter­ national veapon mo:"O efteot1ve 䕔om their v1evpo1nt. Thus Soviet att1tUl䕟 tovard UBO vil1 detend la.rg0l7 on lo,-alt, ot other .netlone to it, and on degree or visor, deo1a1veneee and cd1ea1on vi.th vhioh those nations detend in UBO tha )tncetul o.nd hopef'Ul. concept ot international l:J.fef vhtch that orsaniz.atlon represents to our va7 ot t111D ဩ ng. I rel terate, Moaoov has no abetract devotion ¢,> UNO idanl.s. Its attitude to that organ.1i;at1on vil 1 :.·,iroa.1n eeDentlnllJ' pregmatio and tactical. (D) Tova.rd col<M1al arena and bockvard or dependent peoples, Soviet polj'䕞' even on official plane, vill be directed tcvard ll·'l llconlng ot paver nnd lntluenoe and oonta.cta or advanced "ootern no.tj_one, on thoory that in ao tar ae 䕛\ts pol lr::J' ls 3ucoeas ru1, there vill be created a V80\IU.T1 vhidl li111 .rovol" oomun111t-Soviet penetration. :1ov1et 'r·easure to!' pnl't1c1pcLtlon 1n trusteeship ar䕜·a.ngeme aဪs thus repreeonte, ln my op1n1on, a deelre to be in.a P·nlt1on to compl1cate o.nd inhibit exertion or vea\:orn 1 a.i"luonoe at auch po1nta rather thnn to provide majo!' o䕗l 'fr,•• ezert1nc of Sov1ot pover. llUlD 8"811lfl.O. llM a.c. am am 5(DI or CD ... d Ȩ Ii.-ȩ A ... IQ, 1171 ,.,.,.ca.r .. D=h,,..,, ·1,._ LD.tte:r motive -10- #511, Pebruary 22, 9 p.m,· trom Moaoov via Wor Latter motive is not lacking, hut to:r this Sovleta prete:r to :rel7 on other chonele than ott1o1al truateeahip ar:rangemente. Thus ve may expect to find Soviets asking tor admission eve:ryvhere to trui:teeehip or a1mi1Bl' arrangements and using le •tors ဧ-hus acquired to weaken western 1ntluanoe among such poo1•les. (I) Ruaa1ana will strive ar:orgetloallJ to develop Soviet representation in, and o:rttcial ties v1th, count:r1ea in vhich they aei\se strong poas1b1li ties ot oppaa1t1on to vaotel'n centere llf paver. Th.ls applies to such v1dely oeparatAd po1nts aဥ Ocrmany, Argentina, Middle Eastern countr1eo, otc. (P) In intel'nat1onal economic l\:'lttera. Sov1ot policy vill really be dominated by pul'nuit ,,r e.utG.rcl䕐 :ဦ•· Soviet Union and Sov1et-dom1natod adJ\.फ़ent o.rena taken together. That, hoveve:r, vlll be undl•/•l11ng pnl1c7. Ae tar as ott1o1Al line 1a concerned. ">Oa1t1on 1e not yet cl88.1'. Soviet Oova:rnm.ent hae abov1 strange ret1canoe since termJ.nat1on hoet111t1es on subject foreign trade. It la:rse acale long te1tJD credito should be rorthcoming, I believe Soviet Go\rernment may eventu1䕒11y again do lip eerv1ao, aa it did 1n n1neteen-thirtye 䕌·o deo1rab111ty or building up 1nternnt1onsl econotr11c ex-.·hangeo in general. Othel'Vloe I think it possible 䕏oviet foreign t䕎ade may be restrlctod largol7 to Sov1eia ovn security sphere• including occupied oren3 in Oe111tnny, and that a cold ott1o1nl sbouldel' may be turned to J)l'1nc1ple ot geneJ'al eoonom1c collnbornt1on omong nations. (0) With respect to cultural collabl\l"tlt1on, lip service will 11kev1ae be l'"&nderod to dos1i•ab111 ty of deepening cultural contnots betveen peopl(':J, but thls vlll not in pra.ot1ce Im lntal"preted in an:1 vay vhlဨh '3oul4 veaken security poo1ticn of Soviet peoples. Actual mnn1teetat1ona ot Soviet policy in this respect v111 be reet䕑1oted to arid chonnels ot closolJ shepherded oft1c1al viaite and tuoct!ona, vith euper-nbundanee ot vodka and speechee and dearth ot perl!8n.ent ettects. ll:tlSlrlEI =il!Cltl!JT . E.O. 111u s.c. :icn ODd MD> ar ti) D.pl. cit s.. "'°"'· AȦ 10. 1172 W" .- ·- -ȧ1wu· ,.,_. .,,,.. ,_.,._.__ I (H) Beyo䕍 1 'ti . f . ... ȥ . : ·. :. .. . • , BZRZT -11- #511, Pebrual"J' 22.. 9 p.m. from Moecov via War (B) Be7ond this, tl?viet ott1c1Bl relations v111 take vbat m!gbt be cal:l'Jd "correct" course V1th 1n41v1dual foreign govo·.䕋nmenta, with great stress being laid on prestige of Soviet Un!o.n and its representatives and v1th punct111oua attention to protocol, ae d1et1nct l䕈om good manners • . PAR1' POURa POLLO\fl\CJ MAY BE 5AID AS TO llBAT WE MAY BXPBCT BY VAY OF Dll ' .. EMEN䕇TIOJI OP BASIC SOVIET POLICIBS 011 UlOFPICIAL_. l'i1 SUB'l'B.RRARKAft PI.Alm, 1.e. on PLAD POR wmcn SOVIE'l.' OOVBRnMBRT ACCEPTS 110 RBSPOltSIBILITr Agencies utilized for ·proraule;htion or policies on thla plane are. tollovlne: One, Inner centra.1 core ot oonmn.m1st parties in other oountriea. Vhile mo.DJ nt persons vho oompoae th1a oatesottJ' may also appo& .. and act in unrelated public capao1t1es, they are ill reality working olosel7 together aa an undergrotmd ope䕉·atlng direotornte ot vorld comunism, a conceBJ.ed C1.c1intern t1ghtl7 co .. ordinated and directed by Moeoc.i·. It is 1.mporttlnt to remember that this innor core 1& actually working on und.ergl'ound lines, deopite legc llty or parties uith vhich it ia aeeooiotod • . 'J!vo, .ftank'&nd f1le ot' conn•·u1at parties. Hote d1et1nction la dl'a\m betueen theft and persons det!ned in paragraph one. This distincti·m hoe become much ah&.J'per in recent 7enra. \lherese ."'orinerl7 foreign com:aunlet parties represented a cuဤtous (and tram Moecov•e stand.paint often inconver.::.ढ़nt) mixture or . conspiracy and lcgit!ma.䖇 oct1v11䕊y, nou the cocep1ra­ tor1al element haa been neatly C(•nc-r1ntrated in inner circle and orderod Wldel'ground. i.'hile rank and file--.. no longer even taken into confidlncu about realities or movement---al"e thrust forward as booa. fide internal part1ean.a of certain political tendencles v1th1n their nepective oountrlea, genu1nelJ luaooeut or conspiratol"i&l IRWSlflU SBCidM6 a.o. nw. s.c. 31!) cat 5(D9 • 11D Dlipl. .. llM .... A-. JO. lm -.NL-r •.u:a rw. l'.1.•ll ·J;r.... connection -12- 1511, February 22, 9 p.m. hoa lloacov via Var connection.vith foreign states. On17 1n certain oountriea whel'e oomuniats are numerlcall7 strong do the7 nov regularlJ" appear and aot aa a bocf7. Aa a rul.e theJ" are uaed to penetrate, and to lnfiuenoe or dOl!nate,, as oaae ma7 be, other organ1zat1ona leas l1.kel7 to be suspected ot being tools or Soviet Govermantt vith a viev to accompl1eh1.ng their purPoaee through •) organ1zation11, rather than by direct aot1on a11 a aeparate political party. Tbl'ee. A Vida variety or national aaaoo1at1one or bod1ea vh1ch can be dominated or 1.nfiuenoed b7 auch penetration. 1b.ese 1nolude1 labor Wliona, 7outb. leaguea, vomena orsan1zat1ona, rac1al soo1ot1ea, relig!oua aoo1et1ea, 11oc1ol. organizatloD.S, cultural groups,, liberal megazinea, publishing houses, etc. Pour. International organizationa whiob oan be aim.1larl7 penetrated through lntluenoe over various national componente. Labor,, youth and vomena organ1- zat1ona a.re prominent among the11. Particular, almost vital,, 1mportanoe la attached ln thla oonneotlon to international labor movement. In th.la, Moaoov aeea poaa1b111ty or e1detrack1ng western governments 1D vorld arr&ira and bulldlng up international lobbJ" capable or ocapelling governments to take aotlone favorable to Soviet 1ntereets in various countries and or paral.J'zlng actions disagreeable to U3SR. Five. Russian Orthodox Cburoh, v1th 1ta foreign branohea, and through it the Zatern Orthodox Churah 1n general. 51.x. Pan-Slav move䕆nt and other movement• (Ar.erb61jan, Armenian, Turcoma.n,, eto.) baaed on racial groupe v1th1n 9nvlot Onion. Seven. Oovernments or governing groups vill1Dg to leDd them,elves to Soviet purposes 1n one degree or another, eucb ao present Bu.lga.rlan and yUgoalav govern­ ments, lorth Peralan regime, Chinese Conaun!eta, eto. l(tUS$1rlEI MiRRI E.O. 11Ȥ::. s.c. XD aad 5(DI s cm . .. : . .. __ .. . ··- '" '--" not on17 ,.. . • Dl';lSION OF • CENTRAL SERVICES tn.EGRAPH SECTION ACTIOK:!OR llJl'O: s u c A·B A-C A-D SA SPA Po :1'# ·- DKP.All'rHENT 01'䔽 STATK DCG Ko paraphro.ae ncceသ:1 .. ,r7. B&R!fr INFORMATION CoPT ACTION MUST BE ENDORSED ON ACTION COPY -13-#511, February 22. 9 p.m. from Moeoov via Var. lot on17 propage.nda Dlflehfnee but actual pol1ctee ot these reg1mee caa be placod eztena1ve17 at dlapoaal ot USSR .. .a.t nmv h#t expector1 tlm.t. componont parts ot thla tar- . tlung &PJ'!'..r&tue v• lJ. bo utလ 11 zed, tn ဢcoordanoa v1 th their 'odt vi dual aut tab·J 1 t t7, &'1 rollovs t (A) To und".trm1ne [,䕁n,,ral poltt1cal and atrategto potent1aJ. Of n1&jor V'30tern povere. Efforts Vill be -de 1n auob countrteo to d1erupt national eelt con1"1dence, to bamstr1ng ••a.sureu or unt1onal detenee, to fncreaee aoc1al and tn䕃ust䕄1AJ. unreet, to ot1mu1Qte all tol'lB ot df aunlt7. All persons vith gricvAncan, whether economic or racial, v'll be urged to soelc redMno not. hi mediation and oomprom11e, but t n def1 DI' t v 1 olent atJ"'Ug].e tor deatruett on · o䔼 other elements or noctဟty. Der䔾 poor v1ll be sot aga1net r'ch, black &g8:1nat whl te. young Agalnat old, oevc0B1ers agafnat eetabl1ohed rectdente, etဣ., (B) On unoff1efa.1 pllUlG p&rtlcularl7 vtole:nt efforts v111 be made to veA?c䔿n power and influence ot veatern povers or colon1al, backv䕀rd, or dependent peoplea. Ou th1s level, no holds v111 bဝ barred. Mfetakee and veakneaaea ot veatern colonial allin'u•stre.tton v111 be merollesel7 exposed and explo,ted. Libern.l op•n1on in veatern oountrlea v䕂.11 be mob111ze1 to veaken အnlon'nl pol1c•ea. Resentment onong dependent peoples v111 bo nt1mulated.. And vhtle lat·ter are being encouraged to aook 1ndepcndence of veatern povere, Sovlet domlnn.ted puppet polJ tlcal machlnee vll'.1. be undergofng preparation tn take over domeat1c paver 1u respective colootal a.reo.u vlten 1n<lopende11ce 1a ach1e""letl. · (C) Where Jndlvhlnal governments stand :tn path or Soviet purpoaeo presဠure Y111 be brought tor tbetr removal trom ottlce. 'l'h1 o cl\D hn11pon where govornmenta d1reotl7 oppose Suv1 et foreign po1·1 c:r al mo (Turke7, Iran)• vhero a nzr IRWSlflEI t.o: 11ȣ1. Src. 3'D .- &DI or ရ tbo7 aeo.l oa&CRBft -13+-#511, Pebru&l'J' 22 , 9 p.m. , from Mo1oov via V.111.l' .. . th•J eeal the1 r terr1 tor1 ee ott agai nst Cnn-uni at penetratf on (Sv1 tzerland, Portugal ) ,· Ol' vhere th97 cmpete too atrongl.J' ,. l f ke Labor Oovel'JUlent 1 n Bnglaod, .tor 1D:.:ral domt natf on among alement11 vh1 oh 1 t i s Important .tor COlllUDf at11 to dcn1 nat e . (Sometimes. tvo .;,䔲 thet·• e:t e-.sont• · are present f n a sf ngle caae . Then Coami at oppoe 1 t 1 on becomes partf cul&l'l7 abr1 11 &ad aavag䔴. (D) In foreign countri es COllDUD1 ata vlll , aa a rule , vork toward de11truoti rJn ot all rorma ot per1onal . f ndependence , eoonomf e , 䔱lf t1 oal or aoral . 'l'b.ei:r 17atem c&D handle mly f n:lf v䔻i!uale vho have been b:rougbt tnto ocaplete 䕅ependence on h1 Rher pover. Thu3 , per1<.ma vho are t1 nanc1 allJ' S.lldependent•- auob as 1 nd1v:l dual bua1neaa­ men ., eatate ovntjr11 , &l:lcn eae1"ul .t&1'IJl'!䕹a . art l 9Ul8 RDd all those vho .,xerc :t ae lut:Ja.l. J eaderah1. p or have loo&l. p1•A!:!.䔶 ge , auch as p䔳ular looal olargJD1en or pol 䔷t䔸䔹䔺l 䔵1 gurea , are anathema. I t .l a not bJ' ob.a.nee that even tn tJSR local ott1 c1 ale are kept eonetantl7 on move trca cme job to another , to prevent thei r tak!ng 11:ius:nE1 illiG'AR E.o. i u;u_ s.c. n> mad ယ m မ Depa. cJ Sim. Maei, AUIJ. ID. H71 tr .. ILJ_, .... ._..,u·11·Zc (B) EverJtb!ng II Ill' -14- #511, Fe bl'Ual'J' 22 , 9 p . m . from Noocov v 1t-. if w- (E) Bwl')'thlng poss ible v111 be done to ae t 11Ajor vestern pavera against each other . Ant1-Br1t1ah talc vill he pl䔬ed among J\morloane , ant1-.Amer1can talk among Briti sh . Cont1nental.s , 1noludin.g Oerma.ns, vlll be taught to abhor both Anglo-Suon povera . Where sua­ p1o1ona exist, they vill be taned ; vb.ere not, ignited. lo effort vi䔯 bo spared to discredit and combat all ertorta vhiol! threaten to lead to an1 aort or unltJ' or oobealon at1ong othor (•) f?'OID \lhiob Ruaaia 11.Sgbt be u:oluded . ':thus , all rorma or 1nternat1onal organization not amenable to cooauni s t penetration and control, vhether it be the Ca.tbolio ( .. ) lnterno.tional eaonom!o concerns , or the international f'ratern1CJ or roJaltJ' . and arlatocrac7, must expect to find themselves under tire f'rom m&D.1', and often ( • ) (P) In senerol , Bl.1 Soviet etrorta on unott1o1al international plane vll. be negative Bild destructive 1n cbaracter, . dealgned to tear dovn aouroea ot atrength beyond reach or Soviet control . Dl• 1a onl:J' in 11.De vitb baic Soviet 1nat1nct that there can be no OOUl­ prca.1ee vith rival paver and that constructive vu1•k. OJ.D etart onl7 vhen oOlllUJliat pover is domi nant . But beh1Dd All tbJ.a v111 be applied insistent, unceaa1Dg pressure for penetration and COl!IN'U)d Of ke7 Poait1ona 1D ad•1 n1 stration and eepeoiall7 in police apparatu䔮 ot fore䔭E;D couu䔰r1da . 'fhe Soviet reg1.ma 1e a police regime par excellence , reared in the dim halt vorld ot !'aar1at Police intrigue , Mcuatomed to think primarilJ' 11 terms ot polloe pover . Thie ahoul.d never be lost a1gbt or 111 sa:ugiug Soviet motives . f' AR i' PIY.B I In ewnmer7, ve have hore a polit ical toroe ooattted .ranatioally to the belier thn.t wl th US there can be no permanent modua vivendi . thftt it ie desirable and necoasa17 that the internal ba"t'lnony or our aoc1etJ' be diarupteG, ဘur trad1 t1oonl vay or lite be destroyed, the international authori t-,- or. our s tate be broken, it Soviet povor 11 to he secure . Thie pollt1oal force be.e oomplate pcwer or dlepo9 \t1on over energies or one or vorld ' e greo tl 11 t po o plt!!l 1·1?.d ros <'uro ea ur ffOJ"ld. 1 s richest national terr! tory, and la borne aloq bJ' deep w.ua.,ro !.O. ' "" ._ •rt _ .. ··- . - - and poverrul ACTIOR : EUR IllPO s u A--8 A-C A-D SA SPA UlO :8# CORRECTED PAGE FIPTEKft MB fto paraphrase nece s 3a17 &R8RIK' -15- 1511 . ड़ebrunr1 22 . 9 p . m . , from Moeoov •la W&r and povortul cu!T'lnts or R us slBn nat1onallm . In addition, l t ba nn el䔫born.te o.nd fo.r nung apparatus tor exertion of 1 f;e 1.D flnence ln o ther countriea , an apparatus or 81Mlng flexibility and vvreatilit,. !' managed by people whose experience And eld.11 1n und.'9r­ crouad methods a.re ·prasumn.bl7 vltbout para.J.le1 1.l hle to17 . P1.J:allJ . l t 1 3 aeeminज़7 .l.naoeeaaible to cona1deratlona or r:>al lty lo l te be.e1c reactio.aa . .Por 1t , the Yaa t rllld of' objoctivo Co.c t about bnWlD socJ.'!ltJ 111 not , ae vlth uo ,. tbo me uu.N qniDat vh1ch outlook l a cona tentlJ belug t.ee ted 8J1d re -rormed , but a grail bag . troll vhich 1nd1v1(luo.l l teras Qf'f) selected arblt:.:•1.\ril:r and. tend.en,,1oure1 v to ho 1. ဗto r sn "u tlook al.ready preconc slvad . Tll.6. s 111 admltt.Qdly a.ot a J-•J.ea.sum p1o tuN . rroJ.em of hv _. to cope 'Vl i°.b th.tr䔨 !' orcf1 ln WJdOUb&e«i.LJ 81"tUl\;Utf\i . taak our dlplomn.cy hဖa eve r fl\ced Rl1d probabl7 crest.ea t it vill ev., r have to .race 䔩 I t ebouJ.d be pol.nt of 4epartw·e rrom vhlcil ou.r pol! tico.l. general atatr vork at presont junetu"m ah'lttll•. pronf!ed . It should be appl'Oacled v1th nnn thorouglll'JsB 䔧 ca.re aa aolut:lon or 11ajol' PtrAteglc proble11 1n vo.r , ADCl 1t nece•s&rJ . vi th n o e1111ller nul•Jo.7 ln planning at.fort . I cano·t attempt to ouggun t fl.1 1 sn1 vern he ro . But I vould l:llce to reoord JrQ" convlct1on that p䔪blem la vitbi.D our power to aolve -- &D4 tltnt vi thout 1•acourfte to &DJ' general mJ.lit&r'J' conrl.ict . And ln support or thia conv1ot1on there a.re cer tB.1.n ohnervat.iona of o more encou:raa' nll nature I should l !ke to me.ko : (One ) Zovie t pouer, U)tlike tho.t. or Hitler1ta Oerman7 , 1e neithor •Hbell8t1c nor a.d.von tur13 t1c . It does not; vork by 1"1xed plans . I t dooe not toke wmecoaaar7 ':-l ake . Impervi ous to logic or roa.so.o , and it ia h!gbl.y a·en:iitive to logic of force . For thio reaaou 1 t oan eas117 T.. th­ drav - - - - o.nd uaWlllJ' doe s -- - -vhen a trong rea1at8.JlCI.• 1a 1ca J;;1m1 - - · · · r .,, , , •.. ,, :.-c. m ..t: 5(Dt ii (El 1 encow1t..ared -15'!- 1511 , February 22 , 9 p . m . , troa Moacov via War . enc ountered at any point . Thuo , 11" the adyera&rJ has 1 sutf"1cient force and mnlat s clear bi s reacH.p.e 1s to uae 1 t , he rarely bas to do s o . Ir el tuatiOJUt are propel'l.7 handl ed there need be no prestige engag1 ng abovd.01118 . (Two ) Oauged nga!.ns t ves tern vorld aa a vhole , Sovie ts are s till b7 far the vealm r rorce . Thus , thetr e uccee e v111 rea.1.ly depend on degree or cobea1on , t1.rmea1 and vigor vhich veetern vorld can mus ter . And thia 1e fal'ltor vbich it ia within our pover to influence . (Three ) Suc ce o a or· Sovie t a7s tem , aa form of" lnternal power , l s not 1et f1nall7 proven . I t ba 79t to be demons trated that 1 t can survive supreme text or aucceaalve transfer of power from· one 1D41v1d.u&l. or group to anothe r . Lenin ' s death vae t1rat auch tr&D1ter , am its effects wracked Soviet state for 15 19ara atter Stalin ' s death or ret!:rement vill be second . But even th1a vill .not bo final te䔥 .. t . Soviet internal aya tem will nov be oubjocted , b7 vir tue or recent . territorial expansions , to series or aditonal s trains vhtch on ပe proved aevero tax on Tsardom . Ve here are convinced that nev e r since term1 nat1 on or e lvil var bave ma e of Rua aian people been umotional.lJ' rartbar removed t'i'om doctrines of" comuni et J\Ort7 䔦bo.n t.huy are IUP .. SECIWP. IBUSlf1EI S.O. 1111. &le. န ad S(D) cs cm DilpL ol llale ..... A-. lG. Im ar Al.I ua .,.,.,, .,, . J.Y . toda7 . -16- #5111 Pebru&rJ' 221 9 p .m . 1"1'ca Jloaoov via War tod&J'. In Rwle1a. party baa nov become a great 814--­ tor the """ent---hSgbly auooeestul apparatu.. or d1otator1al adm1 nS atrat1on1 but it. baa oea.eed to be a eouroe ot emotional 1n::1p1.rat1on . Tb.u11 , 1nterD8l. . soundnees and permanenoe or movement need not 7et be regarded aa usured . (Four) All Sovie t propa.genda be7ond Soviet eeovlQ" ephere ia baioallJ' nesative and destruat1ve . It abould. there1"ore be relatively eae7 to ocmbat 1.t bJ' aJQ" 1.nग़ll.1- gent 8.nd 1'981 1 7 oonetruo t1ve program. For these reasons l thlDk ve m&J' •PPI'oa.oh oaJ ml y and v1th good heart proulem of' hov to deal vith Rueeia. As to hov th.111 approach ahould be -.de, I onl7 Viab to advance, b7 V&J' or oouoluaion, tollovi.Dg ooaente 1 (One) our ti.rat etep must be to apprehend, and reoosniee tor vhat it la . the nature ot the movmnent vith vhloh ve are d.M1 1 ng . We IDU8t stud7 it Vith aw oourage1 detaohment, objeot1v1tr, and same dete:rm1 natlon not · to be emotioMl l J' provoked or unseated by 1t, vi.th vhich doctor atwlea 1ua.rul.7 and unreasonable 1nd1v1ख़. · · (Tvo) Ve mu.a t eee that ov Efbllo is educat•ul to realities 01" Russian oituatlon. oanot ovar-empb••iae ill>ortanoe ot tb.J.a . Presa oai:mot do th1.e &lone . It llU8t be done •' nl7 bf' government., vhiah ie neoe•e&l'il7 more experienced and better 1.Dtormed on praotloal problems involved . In t.his ve need not be deterred bJ' tallnnee11 of picture . I am conv1Doed t.hat 1ihere voul4 6e tar leas lqeterioal ant1-Sov1et1em 1D our ooUDtrJ" toda7 if realities or th1a e1tuat1on wre better UDder­ atod b7 our people . Tbere 1• nothlna: aa dangel'0\18 ar aa terr1tJ1.ng aa the wilm.ovn . I t DBJ' alao be argued that to reveal more information on our 41tt1cult1ea v1th Rueaia voul.d reflect W\favorably on RuaaiaD American relat1ona . I reel that it there ia &IQ" real rillk: here involved, it 1• one vhlch ve should have oourage to race., and aooner the better . But I canot see vbat ve vould be r1•k1 ng . OUr atake 1D thle ooUDtl'J', even ocwJ ng on heele of" tremendous deJ1onatrationa of our tr1en.dah1 p ror If(.( ASS if 1£1 l:.O. l l C Ȣ2. S..:. llD and 5roJ ar a) ftu&81&n people 0.,.. °' ::i.,,., w1r.r A 1zs91T •r..N'l. T . क़ 10. l r7J ACTI01' a Iftli'O : s u c A-B A-C A-D SA SPA UlO # BUR AMI · coRRBCTIOR PAOB SBVERTBKl lo i:araphraae neoeaaary , .... -11- 1511, Pe'bru.ary 22 , 9 p. m. , from Mo acov via War Russian people , l a remarkabl7 a.mall . We bave here no 1n­ ve11taent11 to guard, no aotual trade to lo ae , virtually no o1t1aena to protec t , tev aultural oontaate to preserve . OUr onl7 stake lies in vbat ve hope rather than vbat va have ; and I am oonv1naed ve have be tter ohanoe of realizing tbo ae hopea it our publio 1 e enlightened and it our deal1.Dga vitb Ruaa1ans are placed entirely on real1s t1 o and matter ot taot bae1a . ('lbree ) Muob dopou.de OD health and VigoZ" Of OW" OVD society . World co•nnt am is like malignant pu-aalte vhich reed.a onl7 on diseased t1 aaue . Th.l a la point at vb.lob 4o•at1 c and foreign poll oiea aee t . Ev•J'J' oourageoua and 1no1a1ve •aaure t.o solve internal problema ot our ovn aocle t7 , ·to improve aelt contldence , d1 eo1plJ.ne , morale and oomuni t7 ap1r1 t ot our ovn people, 1• a diploma tic vie tol'J' over Moaoov vorth a thousand d1plomat1o notes and Joint 00J111mique11 . I t ve canot abandon tatalim and 1nd1f.terenoe in race ot det1o1enc1ea ot OU.I' ovn aooiety, Moeoov v111 prot1 t- · ·Moaoov cano t help protl ting bJ them in 1ta foreign pol1o1e a . (Four ) Ve mua t formulate and put torvard tor o ther nations a muoh ..,re pas1 t1ve and conatruo tive picture ot aort ot vorld ve vould like to aee than ve have put forward in pa.et . I t 1e not enough to urge people to develop pol1 t1· oal prooeaaee e1m1lar to our ovn. ManJ foreign peoples , in Europe at leas t , are tired and f"rlghtened bJ experieaoea or paa t, and are lea s interested 1n abstract treedoa than 1n aeouritJ . Tbe7 are seeiting gu:ldanoe rather than reap:>na1b111- t1ea . We ahould be hotter able than Ruaa1ana to give them this . And unleaa ve do , Rusalana certalll.J vill . (Pive ) Finally we muo t have oourage a.nd aelt contidenoe to oltng to our ovn metboda and oonoeptlona ot human aooiet1 . After all , tbe greatest danger tba t can befall ua 1n coping vith thla probl• o t Soviet Commiam, 1• that ve shall allov oureelvea to become 11.ke those vi t.h whom ve 8.l"e cop1.Jla. ABHnAR ....