The Geographical Pivot of History STOR H. J. Mackinder The Geographical Journal, Vol. 23, No. 4 (Apr,, 1904), 421-437. Stable URL: http:I/links jstor.org/sici?sici-0016-739892819040492923934493C42193ATGPOH%3E2.0.C0%3B2-0 The Geographical Journal is currently published by The Royal Geographical Society (with the Institute of British Geographers). Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR 's Terms and Conditions of Use; available at http:Iwww jstor orglabout/terms.html. JSTOR s Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part; that unless you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of ajournal Or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use_ Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at http:I/www jstor orgljournalsh/rgs html, Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission. JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to creating and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals. For more information regarding JSTOR , please contact support @jstor org: http: Ilwwwjstor org/ Sun Jul 4 23.15.12 2004 The Geographical Journal. No. 4 APRIL, 1904. VoL. XXIII. THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY_ X By I J. MACKINDER, MA: Reader in Geography in the University of Oxford ; Director of the London School of Economicg and Political Science. WHEN historians in the remote future come to look back on the group of centuries through which we are now passing, and see them fore- shortened, a8 we to-day see the Egyptian dynasties it may well be that will describe the lagt 400 years as the Columbian epoch, and will say that it ended soon after the year 1900. Of late it hag been a common- place to of' geographical exploration a8 nearly over, and it i8 recog- nized that geography must be diverted to the purpose of intensive survey and philosophic synthesis In 400 years the outline of the map of the world has been completed with approximate accuracy, and even in the the voyages of Nansen and Scott have very narrowly reduced the last possibility of dramatic discoveries. But the opening of the twentieth century is appropriate a8 the end of a great historic epoch, not merely o account of this achievement, great though it be: The missionary, the conqueror, the farmer, the miner, and, of late, the engineeI, have followed 80 closely in the traveller 8 footsteps that the world; in its remoter borders, has hardly been revealed before we must chronicle its virtually complete political appropriation: In Europe, North America, South America, Africa, and Australasia there is scarcely a left for the pegging out of a claim of ownership, unless as the result of a war between civilized or half-civilized powers. Even in Asia we are probably witnessing the last moveg of the game first played by the horsemen of Yermak the Cossack and the shipmen of Vasco da Gama: Broadly speaking, we may contrast the Columbian epoch with the age which preceded it, by describing its essential Read at the Royal Geographical Society, January 25, 1904. No. IV.~APBIL, 1904.] 2 F they speak polar regions region 422 THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY. characteristic a8 the expansion of Europe against almost negligible resistances, whereas mediaval Christendom wa8 into 8 narrow and threatened by external barbarism: From the present time forth, in the post-Columbian age, we shall have to deal with a closed political system, and none the legs that it will be one of world- wide scope. explosion of social forces, instead of dissipated in a gurrounding circuit of unknown space and barbaric chaos, will be sharply re-echoed from the far side of the globe , and weak elements in the political and economic organism of the world will be shattered in consequence. There is a vagt difference of effect in the fall of a shell into an earthwork and its fall amid the closed spaces and rigid structures of a great building or ship: Probably some half-conscious- ness of this fact is at last diverting much of the attention of statesmen in all part8 of the world from territorial expansion to the struggle for relative efficiency. It appears to me, therefore, that in the present decade we are for the firgt time in & position to attempt, with some degree of completeness; a correlation between the larger geographical and the larger historical generalizations. For the first time we can perceive something of the real proportion of features ad events on the stage of the whole world, and may seek a formula which shall express certain aspects, at any rate, of geographical causation in universal history: If we are fortunate, that formula should have a practical value a8 setting into perspective some of the competing forces in current international politics The familiar phrase about the westward march of empire is an empirical and mentary attempt of the kind. I propose this evening describing those physical features of the world which I believe to have been most coercive of human action, and presenting some of the chief phases of history a8 organically connected with them, even in the age8 when were unknown to geography. aim will not be to discuss the influence of this Or that kind of feature, Or to make a study in regional geo- graphy, but rather to exhibit human history &8 part of the life of the world organism. I recognize that I can only arrive at one aspect of the truth, and I have no wish to stray into excessive materialism_ Man and not nature initiates, but nature in large measure controle. My concern is with the general physical control, rather than the causes of universal history: It is obvious that only a first approximation to truth can be hoped for; I shall be humble to my critics. The. late Prof. Freeman held that the history which counts is that of the Mediterranean and European races. In a sense, of course, this is true, for it is among these races that have originated the ideas which have rendered the inheritors of Greece and Rome dominant throughout the world: In another and very important sense, however, such a limitation has & cramping effect upon thought. The ideas which go to form & nation, as opposed to a mere crowd of human animals, pent region again Every being frag- they My yet only THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY. 423 have usually been accepted under the pressure of a common tribu- lation, and under a common necessity of resistance to external force. The idea of England wa8 beaten into the Heptarchy by Danish and Norman conquerors the idea of France wag forced upon competing Franks, Goths, and Romans by the Huns at Chalons, and in the Hundred Years' War with England ; the idea of Christendom was born of the Roman persecution8,and matured by the Crusades ; the idea of the United States was accepted, and local colonial patriotigm sunk, only in the War of Independence ; the idea of the German Empire wa8 reluctantly adopted in South Germany oly after a struggle France in comradeghip with North Germany. What I may describe a8 the literary conception of history, by concentrating attention upon ideas and upon the civilization which i8 their outcome, ig apt to lose 8ight of the more elemental movements whose pressure is commonly the exciting cauge of tbe efforts in which ideas are nourished. A repellent personality performg & valuable 8ocial function in uniting his enemies, and it was under the pregsure of external barbarism that Europe achieved her civilization_ I ask JOU, therefore, for a moment to look upon Europe and European history a8 gubordinate to Agia and Asiatic history, for European civilization is, in & very real sense, the outcome of the secular struggle againgt Asiatic invasion: The most remarkable contrast in the political map of moderr Europe is that pregented by the vast area of Rugsia occupying balf the Continent and the group of gmaller territories tenanted by the Western Power8. From a phyeical of view, there i8, of course, 8 like contrast between the unbroken lowland of the east and the rich complex of mountains and islands and peniusulag, which together form the remainder of this of the world: At first sight it would appear that in thege familiar facts we have a correlation between natural evironment and political organization 80 obviou8 a8 hardly to be worthy of description, especially when W0 note that throughout the Russian plain & cld winter i8 opposed to & hot summer; and the conditions of human existence thus rendered additionally uniform_ Yet a eorie8 of historical maps, guch a8 that contained in the Oxford Atla8, will reveal the fact that not merely is the rough coincidence of European Rusgia with the Eastern Plain of Europe a matter of the last hundred years or but that in all earlier time there wa8 pergistent re-agsertion of another tendency in the political grouping: Two group8 of states usually divided the country into northern and southern political systems. The fact is that the orographical map doe8 not express the particular phygical contrast which hag until very lately controlled human movement and settlement in Ruesia. When the screen of winter snow fades northward off the vast face of the plain, it is followed by raing whoge maximum occur8 in and June begide the Black sea, but near the Baltic and White 2 F 2 long againgt great point valley8; part 80, quite May 424 THE GEOGRAPHICAI PIVOT OF HISTORY. sea8 is deferred to July and August. In the south the later summer i8 a of drought. As a congequence of this climatic regime, the north and north-west were forest broken only by marshes; whereas the south and south-east were a boundlegs grassy steppe, with tree8 only the rivers. The line separating the two ran diagonally north-eastward from the northern end of the Carpathians Fig: < 6^ Kazan Mogcow Kief STEPPE MILES 500 Darbishire& Stanford,Ltd_ The Oxford Geog! Institute. EASTERN EUROPE BEFORE THE 19Th CENTU RY , (AFTER DRUDE IN BERGA AU s PhYSIcAL ATLAs) to a in the Ural range nearer to its southern than to its northern extremity. Moscow lies & little to north of this line, O, in other words, on the forest side of it. Outeide Ruseia the boundary of the forest ran westward almost exactly through the centre of the European igthmu8, which is 800 miles acro8s between the Baltic and the Black sea8. Beyond this, in Peningular Europe, the wood8 gpread on through the of Germany in the north, while the steppe lands in the south period regions along : A N D F 0 R E $ T point great plaing THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY. 425 turned the great Transylvanian bagtion of the Carpathiane, and extended up the Danube, through what are now the cornfieldg of Roumania, to the Iron Gates: A detached area of gteppes, known locally a8 Pugsta8, now largely cultivated, occupied the plain of Hungary, ingirt by the forested rim of Carpathian and Alpine mountaing In all the west of Russia, gave in the far nortb, the clearing of the forests, the drainage of Fig ? A.D.I/90 0 6 S MILES 500 Darbishire& Stanford,Ltd, , The Oxford Ceog' Institute. PoliticAL DVISIONS OF EASTERN EUROPE THE TIME 0F THE 3R0 CRUSADE_ (AFTER THE OxFoR D hiStoRicAL ATLAS) the marshes, and the of the steppes have recently averaged the character of the landscape, and in large meagure obliterated a dietinction which wa8 formerly very coercive of humanity. The earlier Russia and Poland were established wholly in the glades of the forest. Through the steppe on the other hand there came from the unknown recesses of Asia, by the gateway between the Ural moun- tains and tbe Caspian sea, in all the centuries from the fifth to the AT tillage 426 THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY. sixteenth, a remarkable succegsion of Turanian nomadic peoples Hung, Avars, Bulgarians, Magyer8, Khazars, Patzinak8, Cumans, Mongole, Kalmuks. Under Attila the Huns established themselves in the midst of the Pugstas, in the uttermost Danubian outlier of the steppe8, and thence dealt blow8 northward, wegtward, and south- ward the settled peoples of Europe. A of modern Flg-3 A.D. 1519 SIBiR- R U S S | A KAZAN; ASTRAKHAN CRIMEA; Tartar&Turkish States MiLEs 500 Darbishire& StanfordLtd. The Oxford Geog! Institute POLITICAL DIVISIONS 0F EASTERN EUROPE AT THE AcCESSION 0F CHARLES V. (AFTER THE OXFORD HISTORICAL ATLAS) history might be written a8 a commentary upon the changeg directly or indirectly ensuing from these raide. The Angles and Saxon8, it i8 posgible, were then driven to cro88 the gea8 to found England in Britain: The Frank8, the Goths, and the Roman provincials were compelled, for the firgt time, to stand shoulder to shoulder on the battlefield of Ohalong, making common cause againgt the Agiatics, who were unconsciously; welding together modern France: Venice againgt large part P0 LA N D Zaporogian "Cossacks quite THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY. 427 was founded from the destruction of Aquileia and Padua and even the Papacy owed a decisive prestige to the successful mediation of Leo with Attila at Milan. Such was the harvest of results produced by a cloud of ruthless and idealess horsemen sweeping over the un- impeded plain ~a blow, a8 it were, from the Agiatic hammer striking freely through the vacant gpace. The Huns were followed by the Avars. It wa8 for a marchland againgt these that Austria was founded, and Vienna fortified, a8 the result of the campaigns of Charlemagne. The Magyar came next, and by incesgant raiding from his steppe base in Hungary increased the significance of tbe Austrian outpost, 80 drawing the political focus of Germany east- ward to the margin of the realm. The Bulgarian established a ruling caste south of the Danube, and has left his name upon the map, although his language has yielded to that of bis-Slavonic subjecte_ Perhaps the longest and most effective occupation of the Russian steppe proper was that of the Khazar8, who were contemporaries of the Saracen movement tbe Arab geographers knew the Caspian a8 the Khazar sea. In the ed, however; new hordes arrived from Mongolia, and for two centuries Russia in the northern forest 66 9) was held tributary to the Mongol Khang of Kipchak, or the Steppe;' and Russian development was thus delayed and biasged at a time when the remainder of Europe wa8 rapidly advancing: It ghould be noted that the rivers running from the Forest to the Black and Oaspian seas cross the whole breadth of the steppe-land of the nomads, and that from time to time there were trangient move- ments their courses at right to the movement of the horsemen. Thus the missionaries of Greek Ohristianity ascended the Dnieper to Kief; just a8 beforehand the Norse Varangians had descended the same river on their way to Constantinople. Still earlier, the Teutonic Gothg appear for a moment upon the Dniester, having crossed Europe from the shores of the Baltic in the same south-eastward direction_ But these are passing episodes which d0 not invalidate the broader generalization. For a thousand years a geries of horce-riding peopleg emerged from Asia tbrough the broad interval between the Ural mountaing and the Caspian sea, rode through the open spaces of southern Russia, and struck home into Hungary in the very heart of the European peningula, shaping by the necessity of opposing them the history of each of the great peoples around_~the Rugsians, the Germang, the French, the Italians, and the Byzantine Greeks That stimu- lated healthy and powerful reaction, instead of orushing opposition under a widespread despotism, wa8 due to the fact that the mobility of their power wa8 Cunditioned by the steppes, and necessarily ceased in the gurrounding forests and mountains. A rival mobility of power wa8 that of the Vikings in their boats. Descending from Scandinavia both upon the northern and the southern Pope great great path angles along they 428 THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY shores of Europe, penetrated inland by the river ways. But the scope of their action was limited, broadly speaking, their power was effective only in the neighbourhood of the water: Thus the settled of , Europe gripped between two pressures--that of the Asiatic nomads from the east, and on the other three sides that 0f the pirates from the sea. From its very nature neither pressure was over- whelming, and both therefore were stimulative. It is noteworthy that the formative influence of the Scandinavians was second only in nificance to that of the nomads, for under their attack both England and France made moves towards while the of Italy was broken by them. In earlier times, Rome had mobilized the power of her settled peoples by means of her roads, but the Roman roads had fallen into and were not replaced until the eighteenth century: It is likely that even the Hunnish invasion was by no means the first of the Asiatic series. The Scythians of the Homeric and Hero- dotian accounts, drinking the milk of mares, obviously practised the same arts of life, were probably of the same race a8 the later inbabitants of the steppe. The Celtic element in the river-names Don, Donetz, Dneiper , Dneister, and Danube may possibly betoken the passage of peoples of similar habits, though not of identical race, but it is not unlikely that the Celts came merely from the northern forests, like the Goths and Varangians of a later time. The of population, however, which the anthropologists characterize a8 Cephalic, driven westward from Brachy-Cephalic Asia through Central Europe into France, is apparently intrusive between the northern, western, and southern Dolico-Cephalic populations, and may very * probably have been derived from Asia. The full meaning of Asiatic influence upon Europe is not, however, discernible until wO come to the Mongol invasions of the ffteenth century but before we analyze the essential facts concerning these, it is desirable to shift our geographical view-point from Europe, s0 that we may consider the Old World in its entirety. It is obvious that, since tbe rainfall is derived from the sea, the heart of the greatest land-mass is likely to be relatively We are not, therefore, sur- to find that two-thirds of all the world' s population is concen- trated in relatively small areas along the marging of the great continent in Europe, beside the Atlantic ocean; in the Indies and China; beside the Indian and Pacific oceans. A vast belt of almost uninhabited, because practically rainlegs, land extenda as the Sabara completely across Northern Africa into Arabia. Central and Southern Africa were almost a8 completely severed from Europe and Asia throughout the greater of history a8 were the Americas and Australia. In fact, the southern boundary of Europe was and is the Sahara rather than the See 'The Raccs of Europe;' by Prof. W. Z. Ripley (Kegan Paul, 1900) they for, peoples lay 8ig- long unity, unity decaY, and wedge great Brachy- dry: prised part THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY, 429 Mediterranean, for it is the desert which divides the black man from the white. The continuous land-mags of Euro-Agia thus included between the ocean and the desert measures 21,000,000 square miles, or half of all the land on the globe, if we exclude from reckoning the deserts of Sahara and Arabia: There are many detached deserts scat- tered through from Syria and Persia north-eastward to Manchuria, but no such continuous vacancy a8 to be comparable with the Sahara. On the other band, Euro-Asia is characterized by & very remarkable distribution of river drainage. Throughout an immenge of the centre and north, the rivers bave been practically useless for purposes of human communication with the outer world_ The Volga, the and the Jaxartes drain into salt lakes ; the Obi, the Yenesei, and the Lena into the frozen ocean of the north: These are six 0f the Fig Darbishire & Stanford Ltd. The Oxford Geog' Institute. CONTINENTAL AND ARCTIC DRAINAGE EQUAL AREA PROJECTION greatest rivers in the world. There are many gmaller but still con - siderable streams in the same area, such a8 the Tarim and the Helmund, which gimilarly fail to reach the ocean_ Thus the core of Euro-Agia, although mottled with desert patches, is on the whole a steppe-land supplying a wide-spread if often scanty pasture, and there are not a few river-fed oases in it, but it is wholly unpenetrated by waterways from tbe ocean. In other words, wO have in thig immense area all the conditiong for the maintenance 0f &a sparse, but in the aggregate considerable, population of horge-riding anl camel-riding nomads. Their realm is limited northward by a broad belt of gub-arctic forest and marsh, wherein tbe climate is too rigorous, except at the eastern and western extremities, for the development of agricultural settlements In the east the forests extend gouthward to the Pacific coast in the Amur Asia, portion Oxu8, 430 THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY. land and Manchuria: Similarly in the west,in prehistoric Europe, forest was the predominant vegetation. Thus framed in to the north-east, north, and north-west, the steppe8 continuously for 4000 miles from the Pussta8 of Hungary to the Little Gobi of Manchuria, and, except in their westernmost extremity, are untraversed by rivers draining to an accessible ocean, for W0 may the very recent efforts to trade to the mouths of the Obi and Yenisei. In Europe; Western Siberia, and Western Turkestan the steppe lands lie low, in some places below the level of the gea. Further to east, in Mongolia, extend over plateaux ; but the passage from the one level to the other, over the naked, unscarped lower ranges of the arid heart-land, pregents little difficulty: The hordes which ultimately fell upon Europe in the middle of the fourteenth century gathered their first force 8000 miles away on the high steppes of Mongolia. The havoc wrought for & few in Poland, Silesia, Moravia, Hungary, Croatia, and Servia was, however, but the remotest and the most transient result of the stirring of the nomads of the East associated with the name of Ghenghiz Khan_ While the Golden Horde occupied the steppe of Kipchak, from the Sea of Aral, through the interval between the Ural range and the Caspian, to the foot of the Carpathians, another horde, descending south-westward between the Caspian sea and the Hindu Kush into Persia, Mesopotamia, and even into Syria, founded the domain of the Ilkhan. A third gubsequently struck into Northern China, conquering Cathay: India and Mangi, or Southern China, were for a time shel- tered by the incomparable barrier of Tibet, to whose efiicacy there is, perhaps, nothing similar in the world, unless it be the Sahara desert and the ice. But at a later time, in the of Marco Polo in the case of Mangi, in those of Tamerlane in the cage of India, the obstacle wag circumvented. Thus it happened that in this typical and well-recorded instance, all the settled margins of the Old World sooner or later felt the expangive force of mobile power originating in the steppe. Russia, Persia, India, and China were either made tributary, or received Mongol dynasties. Even the incipient power of the Turks in Asia Minor was struck down for half a century. As in the case of Europe, 8 in other marginal lands of Furo-Agia there are records of earlier invasions: China had more than once to submit to conquest from the north ; India several times to conquest from the north-west. In the case of Persia, however, at least one of the earlier degcents has a significance in the history of Western civilization. Three Or four centurieg before the Mongols, the Seljuk Turk8, emerging from Central Agia, overran by this an immenge area of the land, which we may describe a8 of the five seas_ = Caspian, Black, Mediterranean, Red, and Persian_ established themgelves at Kerman, at Hamadan, and in Asia Minor, and overthrew the spread they neglect they years great day8 polar special path They they THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY. 431 Saracen dominion of Bagdad and Damagcus. It was ostensibly to punish their treatment of the Christian pilgrims at Jerusalem that Chrigten- dom undertook the great serieg of campaigng known collectively &8 the Crusadee . Although these failed in their immediate objects, 8O stirred and united Europe that we may count them a8 the beginning of modern history- another striking ingtance of European advance stimulated by the necessity of reacting against presgure from the heart of Agia. The conception of Euro-Asia to which we thug attain is that of a continuous land, ice-girt in the north, water-girt elsewhere, measuring 21 million square miles, Or more than three times the area of North America, whoge centre and north, measuring some 9 million square miles, or more than twice the area of Europe, have no available water-wayg to the ocean, but, on the other hand, except in the subarctic forest, are very generally favourable to the mobility of horgemen and camelmen: To east, south, and west of this heart-land are marginal regiong, ranged in a vast crescent, accessible to ghipmen According to phyeical conformation, these regions are four in number; and it is not a little remarkable tbat in a general way respectively coincide with the spheres of the four religiong__Buddhism, Brahminism, Mahometanism, and Ohristianity. The first two are the monsoon lands, turned the one towards the Pacific, and the other towards the Indian ocean. The fourth i8 watered by the Atlantic raing from the west. These three together, measuring lesg than 7 million square miles, have more than 1000 million people, or two-thirds of the world population. The third, coinciding with the land of the Five a8 it i8 more often degcribed, the Nearer East, is in measure deprived of moisture by the proximity of A and, except in the 0a808, i8 therefore thinly peopled. In some degree it partakes of the characteristics both of the marginal belt and of the central area of Euro-Asia. It i8 mainly devoid of forest, is patched with desert, and is therefore guitable for the operations of the nomad Dominantly, however, it is marginal, for sea-gulfs and oceanic rivers it open to sea-power, and permit of the exercise of such power from it: As a consequence, periodically throughout history, we have here had empires belonging essentially to the marginal geries, baged on the agricultural populations of the great 0a808 of Babylonia and Egypt,and in free water-communication with the civilized world8 of the Mediterranean and the Indieg. But, a8 we should expect; these empires have subject to an unparalleled series of revolutions, some due to Scythian, Turkish, and Mongol raids from Central otherg to the efforb o€ the Mediterranean peopleg to conquer the overland ways from the western to the eagtern Ocean_ Here i8 the weakest gpot in the girdle of early civilization8, for the isthmus of Suez divided sea - power into Eagtern and Western;and the arid waste8 of Persia advancing from Central Asia to the Persian gave constant opportunity for they they great Europe, Seas, O1 , large frica, lay been Agia, gulf 432 THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY. nomad-power to strike home to the ocean edg0, dividing India and China, on the one hand, from the Mediterranean world on the otber. Whenever the Babylonian, the Syrian, and the Egyptian oases were weakly held, the gteppe-peoples could treat the open tablelands of Iran and Asia Minor a8 forward posts whence to gtrike through the Punjab into India, through Syria into Egypt, and over the broken bridge of the Bogphorus and Dardanelleg into Hungary: Vienna stood in tho gateway of Inner Europe, withstanding the nomadic raidg, both those which came by the direct road through the Rusgian gteppe, and those which cam0 by the way to south of the Black and Caspian seas. Here we have illugtrated the essential difference between the Saracen and the Turkish controls of the Nearer East. The Saracens wore a branch of the Semitic race, essen of the Euphrates and Nile and of the smaller oas08 of Lower Asia. created a empire by availing themselves of the two mobilities permitted by their land--that of tbe horse and camel on the one hand, that of the ghip on the other: At different times their fleets controlled both the Mediter- ranean a3 far a8 Spain, and the Indian ocean to the islands. From their strategically central position between the eastern and western ocean8, attempted the conquest of all the marginal lands of the Old World, imi- itating Alexander and an ticipating Napoleon: could even threaten the steppe land. Wholly distinct from Arabia as from Europe, India, and China were the Turanian pagan8 from the closed heart of the Turks who destroyed the Saracen civilization_ Mobility upon the ocean is the natural rival of horge and camel mobility in the heart of the continent. It was upon navigation of oceanic rivers that was based the Potamic stage of civilization, that of China on the Yangtse, that of India o the Ganges, that of Babylonia on the Euphrates, that of Egypt o the Nile. It was essentially upon the navigation of the Mediterranean that was baged what has been described a8 the Thalagsic stage of civilization, that of the Greeks and Romans. The Saraceng and the Vikings held sway by navigation of the oceanic coaste. The all-important result of the discovery of the Cape road to the Indies wag to connect the western and eastern coastal navigation8 of Euro- Asia, even though by a circuitoug route, and thue in some measure to neutralize the gtrategical advantage of the central position of the steppe- nomads by pregsing upon them in rear: The revolution commenced by the mariners of the Columbian generation eudowed Christendom with the widest possible mobility of power, short of a winged mobility The one and continuoug ocean enveloping the divided and ingular lands i8, of course, the geographical condition ofultimate unity in the command of the sea, and of the whole theory of modern strategy and policy loop tially peoples They great Malay they They Agia, great naval THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY. 433 a8 expounded by such writerg a8 Captain Maban and Mr: Spencer Wilkin- son_ The broad political effect was to reverse the relations of Europe and Asia, for whereas in the Middle Age8 Europe was between an impassable desert to south, an unknown ocean to west, and 01' forested wastes to north and north-east, and in the east and south- east was constantly threatened by the superior mobility of the horsemen and camelmen, she now emerged upon the world, multiplying more than thirty-fold the gea surface and coagtal lands to which ghe had access, and wrapping her influence round the Euro-Asiatic land-power which had hitherto threatened her very existence. New Europeg were created in the vacant lands discovered in the midet 0f the waters, and what Britain and Scandinavia were to Europe in the earlier time; that have America and Australia, and in some meagure even Trang-Saharan Africa, now become to Euro-Asia. Britain, Canada, the United States, South Africa, Australia, and are now a ring of outer and ingular bage8 for sea-power and commerce, inaccegsible to the land-power of Euro-Asia. But the land power still remaing, and recent events have in- creased itg significance. While the maritime of Wegtern Europe have covered the ocean with their feets, settled the outer continents, and in varying degree made tributary the oceanic marging of Rugsia has organized the Cossack8, and, emerging from her northern forests, hag policed the gteppe by setting her own nomads to meet the Tartar nomads. The Tudor century, which sa W the expangion of Western Europe over the gea, also gaw Rugsian power carried frou Moscow through Siberia. The eastward swoop of the horsemen across Asia was an event almost a8 pregnant with political consequences a8 was the rounding of the although the two movements remained apart. It is probably oe of the most striking coincidences of history that the geaward and the landward expangion of Europe ghould, in & senge, continue the ancient oppogition between Roman and Greek. Few great failures have had more far-reaching consequences than the failure of Rome to Latinize the Greek. The Teuton was civilized and Christianized by the Roman, the Slav in the main by the Greek: It is the Romano- Teuton who in later times embarked upon the ocean ; it wag the Graeco- Slav who rode over the steppes, conquering the Turanian_ Thug the modern land-power differs from the sea-power no legs in the source of it8 ideals than in the material conditions of its mobility: In the wake of the Cossack, Russia has safely emerged from her former seclusion in the northern forests. Perhaps the change of greatest This statement Wag crilicized in the discugsion which followed the reading of the paper. On reconsidering the paragraph, I still think it substantially correct Even the Byzantine Greek would have been other than he was had Rome completed the subjugation of the ancient Greek: No doubt the ideals spoken of were Byzantine rather than Hellenic, but were not Roman, which i8 the caged icy Japan again peoples Agia, Cape; long they point. 434 THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY. intringic importance which took place in Europe in the last century was the southward migration of the Rugsian peasants, 80 that, whereas cultural settlements formerly ended at the foregt boundary, the centre of the population of all European Russia now lies to south of that boundary, in the midst of the wheat-fieldg which have replaced the more western steppes Odesga has here risen to importance with the rapidity of an American city. A generation ag0 steam and the Suez canal appeared to have increased the mobility of sea-power relatively to land-power: Railways acted chiefly a8 feeders to ocean-going commerce. But trans-conti- nental railways are now transmuting the conditiong of land-power; and nowhere can have such effect as in the closed heart-land of Euro- Asia, in vast areas of which neither timber nor accessible stone wa8 available for road-making: Railways work the greater"wonders in the steppe, because they directly replace horse ad camel mobility, the road stage of development having here been omitted In the matter of commerce it must not be forgotten that ocean-going traffc, however relatively usually involves the fourfold handling of goods-_at the factory of origin, at the export wharf, at the import wharf; and at the inland warehouse for retail distribution ; whereas the continental railway truck may run direct from the exporting factory into the importing warehouge. Thus marginal ocean-fed commerce tends, ther equal, to form a zone of penetration round the continents, whoge inner limit is roughly marked by the line which the cost of four handlings, the oceanic freight; and the railway freight from the neighbouring cast, is equivalent to the cst of two handlings and the continental railway freight. English and German coals are gaid to compete on such termg midway through Lombardy_ The Rugsian railways have a clear run of 6000 miles from Wirballen in the west to Vladivostok in the east. The Rugsian army in Manchuria is a8 significant evidence of mobile land-power a8 the British army in South Africa was of sea-power: True, that the Trans- Siberian railway is still a single and precarious line of communication, but the century will not be old before all Asia is covered with railways The spaces within the Russian Empire and Mongolia are 80 vast, and their potentialities in population, wheat, cotton, fuel, and metals 80 incalculably great, that it is inevitable that a vast economic world, more or less apart, will there develop inaccessible to oceanic commerce. As we consider this review of the broader currents of history, does not a certain persistence of geographical relationship become evident ? Is not the pivot of' the world' 8 politics that vast area of Euro-Asia wbich is inaccessible to ship8, but in antiquity open to the horse-riding nomads, and is about to be covered with a network of railways ? There have been and are here the conditions of & mobility of military and economic power of a far-reaching and agri- they cheap, things being along rapid region lay to-day yet THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY. 435 Fig: 5 1 [ 1 S ' 4 [ 2 $.` U 3 3 7 U) W $' 0 1 $ 6 :' ( $ *s { 20 8 0 H 21 7 0 1 1 (n D 1 N 3 )- 3 & ? 1 11" 1 2$ 1 J IAC 436 THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY . limited cbaracter_ Russia replaces the Mongol Empire. Her pressure on Finland, on Scandinavia, o Poland, on on Persia, on India, and on China, the centrifugal raids of the steppemen. In the world at large she occupies the central strategical position held by Germany in Europe. She can strike on all sides and be struck from all sides, save the north: The full development of her modern railway mobility is merely a matter of time Nor is it likely that any possible social revolution will alter her essential relations to the geo- limits of her existence. Wisely recognizing the fundamental limits of her pOwer, her rulers have with Alaska ; for it is as much a of policy for Russia to own nothing over gea8 as for Britain to be supreme on the ocean Outside the pivot area, in a great inner crescent, are Germany , Austria, Turkey, India, ad China, and in an outer crescent, Britain, South Africa, Australia, the United States, Canada, and Japan. In the present condition of the balance of power, the pivot state, Russia, is not equivalent to the peripheral states, and there is room for an in France. The United States has recently become a0 eastern pOwer, affecting the European balance not directly, but through Russia, and she will construct the Panama canal to make her Mississippi and Atlantic resources available in the Pacific. From this of view the real divide between east and wost is to be found in the Atlantic ocean_ The oversetting of the balance of power in favour of the pivot gtate, resulting in its expansion over the marginal lands of Euro-Asia, would permit of the us0 of vast continental resourceg for feet-building, and the empire of the world would then be in 8ight. This might happen if Germany were to ally herself with Russia. The threat of such an event should; therefore, throw France into alliance with the over-sea powers, and France, Italy, Egypt, India, and Corea would become SO many heads where the outside navie would support armies to compel the pivot allieg to deploy land forceg and prevent them from concentrating their whole strength on feets. On a smaller scale that wab what Wellington accompliehed from his gea-bage at Torres Vedras in the Peningular War; not this in the end prove to be the strategical function of India in the British Imperial 2 Is not' this the idea underlying Mr . Amery'8 conception that the British military front stretches from the through India to Japan ? The development of the vast potentialities of South America might have a decisive influence upon the system: might strengthen the United States, O, on the other hand, if Germany were to challenge the Monroe doctrine successfully, might detach Berlin from what I may perhaps degcribe a8 a pivot policy. The particular combinationg of brought into balance are not material ; my contention is that from a geographical of view are likely to rotate round the 'Turkey, replaces great graphical parted law equi- poise point bridge May system Cape They they power they point THE GEOGRAPHICAL PIVOT OF HISTORY_DISCUSSION. 437 pivot state, which is always likely to be great, but with limited mobility a8 compared with the gurrounding marginal and ingular powere. I bave as a geographer. The actual balance of political power at any given time is, of course, the product, on the oe band, of geographical conditions, both economic and ttrategic, and, o the, other hand; of the relative number, virility, equipment, and organization of the competing peoples; In proportion a8 these quantities are accurately estimated are we likely to adjust differences without the crude resort to arms. And the geographical quantities in the calculation are more meagurable and more nearly constant than the human. Hence we should expect to find our formula apply equally to history and to present politics. The social movements of all times have played around essen- tially the eame phygical features, for I doubt whether the progressive desiccation of Asia and Africa, even if proved, hag in historical times vitally altered the human environment. The westward march of empire appears to me to have been a ghort rotation of marginal power round tbe south-western and western edge of the pivotal area. The Nearer, Middle, and Far Eastern questions relate to the unstable equilibrium of inner and outer powers in thoge of the marginal crescent where local power i8, at present, more or les8 negligible. In cnclugion, it may be well expressly to out that the sub- stitution of gome new control of the inland area for that of Russia would not tend to reduce the geographical significance of the pivot tion Were the Chinese; for instance, organized by the Japanese, to overthrow the Russian Empire and conquer its territory, might constitute tbe yellow to the world's freedom just because would add an oceanic frontage to the regources of the continent, an advantage a8 denied to the Russian tenant of the pivot Before the reading of the paper, the PRESIDENT said We are alwayg very glad when we can induce our friend Mr. Mackinder to address u8 o any subject, because all he says to us is sure to be interesting ad original and valuable. There is no peceesity for me to introduce s old : friend of the Society to the meeting; and I will therefore at once ask him to read his paper. After the reading of the paper, the PRESTDENT said We that Mr: Spencer Wilkingon will offer gome criticism on Mr. Mackinder'$ paper: Of course, it will not be possible to avoid geographical politics to & certain extent. Mr. SPENCER WILKINSON It would occur to me that the most natural and the mogt gincere to say at the beginning ig to endeavour to express the gratitude which, I am sure, every one here feels for one of the mogt stimu- papers that has been read for & time As I was listening to the paper, I looked with regret on some of the space that is unoccupied here, and I much regret that & portion of it wag not occupied by the memberg of the Cabinet, for I gathered that in Mr. Mackinder'g paper we have two main doctrineg laid down the first, which is not altogether new__I think it wag foregeen gome yearg back in the last century__that since the modern improvements of stexm navigation the whole of the world has become one, and has become one political system: [ forget the No. IV._APBIL; 1904.] 2 G spoken past parts point posit they peril they great yet region. hope tbing thing great lating long