AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA W A R Author Bharata Charitra Bhaskara" PANDIT KOTA VENKATACHELAM Vijnana Grandhamala - Publication 4 25 Agz OF TNE MAHABHARA ! A W A R AUthoR "Bharata Charitra Bhaskara" PANDIT KOTA VENKATACHELAM For Copies : 61646 Dr. K. N. SASTRY Ananda Ayurvedic Drug Research Institute & Pharmacy A D R / P s Kotavari Building8, Bagant Road, Candhinagar, VIJAYAWADA 5 520 003. (SOUtH INDIA ) Arya First Edition : Kali Saka 5092 A. D,, 1991 Vikrama Saka 4 2048 Salivahana Saka 4 1913 Oopios Six hundred. Price : Rg. 36=00 T AA "N Ks We are very inuch thankful to tk:e donors whose names are given below for thei1 CO-operation in publishing this book by contributing & donation of rupees 0n0 thousard each. 1 Dr. Y. V. SJMA YAJULU, 8702, Rogs Sireet, Bowie Md. 20720 U. S. A; 2. Sri B: KAMASASTRY, Advocale, Gunduvari Street, Rajahmundry. 3 Smt. GUDA SARASWATAMMA, W /o. Lalo Venkata Sastry Gart, 1-8-44, Chikkadapalli, Hyderabad - 20. 4 Sri M. VENU GOPALA KRISHNA MURTHY, (Sfficer; 8. B. 8. N. Puram; Vijayawada ~ 11. 5 . Sri 1. 8. BABUT, #Srinivas" 1-1-230/8-3, Viveknagar, Hyderabad 20. PUBLISHERS All Rights Resorved by the Publishers Printers : Tirumala Arl' Printerg, Mesuem Road; Vijayawada E 520 002. I. ), 1 "BHARATA CHARITRA BHASKARA" "'VIMARSAKAGRESARA" PANDIT KOTA VENKATACHELAM Author PUBLISHER'S NOTE After forty years of Regearch in the field of Indian Hislory, the Author PANDIT KOTA VENKATACHELAM has rangacked the indigenous literature dealing with our Indian History &8 als0 tho great bulk of the Easlern and Western books, the writings of the Western Indologists and thoir Indian followers and has refutod the illogical argunlents of the Western Historians; establishod the truth of the his orical data detailed in our Puranas from the Mahabharata Wa1 3138 B. @. Tho Anthor already published 24 books &nd this #AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR" is the twenty fifth in his series: Pandit Kotx Venkatachelam i8 our father and is now known, after assuming the ochre robes in the yoar 1957 28 #Jagadguru, Sankaracharya' SRI ADWAYANANDA SANKARABHARATI SwAMY, (Peethadhipati of Sri Abhinava Virupaksha Poothan). The Author comnoncod tho of this book of tho Mahebharata War' in tl10 yoar 1957 and cornpleted it in the year 1959, and after few of the complevion of this book he attained Siddhi on 12-11-1959 A. D, 01 Kali Saka 5060, Vikari, Kartika Suddha Trayodasi: Since & long lime this book is in dark and now it is seeing light with tho CO- operation givon our Near and Dear. KOTA SRI KRISHNANANDAM Dr . KOT A NITY ANANDA SAST RY Publigherg: writing #Ago days by AGE OF THE MAHABFARATA WAR CDNTENTs AUTHOE'S PREH ACE 1 to xii TOPIC PAGE 1 Internal Evidence 1 II Interpolalions in Kalhana' s Rajatarangini 12 III The Yudhistira Era 17 IV Conjunclion of Sevon Planets and Panchangas (Annual Calondars) 23 V The Saptarshi Era 26 " VI Astronomical Evidence 32 V[I Wrong Conjuctures 44 9) VIII Inscriptional Evidence 46 39 IX Opinions of Historical Scholars 61 99 X No ingcriptional evidence to the Ancient History of Bharat thc Modern higtorians 63 XI Movement of the Saplarshi Mandala and contemporary of Alexander explained 65 99 XII False propaganda of European Orienlalis?s 77 99$ XIII History of Magadha or History of Modern Ancient India 80 XIV Hislory of Kashmir 86 XV History of Nopal 94 XVI Higtoricity of Vikramedityo 99 XVII Sir William Jones, Prof. Max Muller and Mr. Troycr 101 XVIII True Chronology of Anciont Higlory of Bharat 112 by THE AGE OF THE MAFABHARATA WAR PR EF ACE rat II aqariutfuaTgfz ta€ 3rraw | agttatruraiv geqlsatattfuatt II #aqtat ?-X? 6[he cultivated mind is one-pointed and its determinations are firm. The uncultivated mind is & prey to fancy and 91 its decisions ar0 fickle and fleeting:' (Geeta-2-41) The conclusiong arrived at by cultivaved minds, matured the study of the Iraditional lore,stand firm and unambiguoug.The opinions of vnoultivalcd minds, ignorant of the traditional lore vsry from time to time and lead to controversieg: The truth of the senti- ment is illustratcd in the writings of the modern his- orians of India, who, without any attompt to acqua- int themselves with the gncient litcraturo of the land, and with implicit unqucs?oning faith in the veracity or validity of the wrilings of tle foreign historians who had deliberately concocted & falsehistory of our coundry with a view {o minimige {le antiquily of our civilisation, deprive u8 of gelf-respect, and on fol evcr in hond"1ge andl ander their domination, ende- avou1' unsucc sssfullytoreconstruct & cogentand com- prehensive history of the country ard pregent & pa thetic and deplorable spectable to all gonnine lovers of Uhe land. Unless and until Our hialorians ignoro completely efface from their minds for & time, #he false historical writingg of the foroigners which clo- sed their vision and blind them to the Aruth and sit at the feet of the indigenoug gcholars of the traditi- by keep ii onal lore of the land 01' study the Epicsand the pura- nas and other historical writings in Ou" ancient lite- rature, they will never be able to learn O determine the true history of Our country. A true historical determination should stand the test of time &nd never be liable to change from time to tine: It cannot be decided majority niong. It cannot be the result of conjectures and theories 01 ingenious arguments and counter org- ments. It must be baged on the evidence of eye- wit- nesses, 01 records baged upon the reports of eye- wit- nesses. The sage Vyasa,revered in the country a8 & very incarnation of God hasrecorded in the Mahabharath: , our sacred national epic, that 36 years after the term- ination of the Great War in which the Karavas were all defeated and destroyed and the Pandavas came out victorioug. Sri Krishna, who played a prom- inent part in the War and in securing the vicotry for the Pandavas; stuffled off his mortal coil and from that year the Kaliyuga commenced: Vyasa wag a contemporary and an eye- witness of the battle. The facts of the Great; War and the parties lo it and the result of it a10 admitted one all ancient nalive writers and modern foreign and native historians But the date of the War S0 specifically mentioned by Vyasa is ignored and varied and fanciful determina- tions of the same are suggested these historiang. Where is the need for conjectures and theories in the matter and how can conjectures and theories lead 18 to the truth ? Sri Vyaga was present on the sceneatthe time of the war and during the period of the negotiations and opi- by ond by by iii the attempis to avert the war that just preceded itand himgelf played & prominent part in the deliberations and negotiations and advised the wicked sons of Dhritarashlra, who were responsible for the war. They did not heed his advice but persisted in their attitude which brought about the war and perished in it. He was actually present at the time, the common progenitor of the Kauravas a8 well as Pandavag, witnessed the battle in person, and recorded the story of the war with the title SMAHABHARATA"_ Therein the time of the war is thus specifically narrated: The Kauravas were all destroyed in ihe war: The Pandavas were victorious. The eldest of them Yudhi- shtira wag Crowned Emperor of Bharat on the 10th after the completion of the battle. In the 36th year of his reign, Sri Krishna, the incarnation of God, who has played & prominenl partin the war and contributed considerably to the 'guccess of Yudhi_ shtira ceased his morta] existerco and returned to Vaikuntha. On receipt of ilig nows the monarch pla- ced his grandson tParikshit' on tho throne and pro" ceeded on & pilgrimage tour to al] the chief shrines in {ho counlry accompanied by his consort Draupadi and all his four brotherg: The Kaliyuga is reckoned from the momont of Sri Krishna's niryana: This is what we find in the Mahabharata. Thig account is well-known to all the people 0f Bharat Ak.e laymen &8 well af the gcholars; with the least acqu- aintance with our epice and puranag. It w88 pregcri- hed in the calondars of the country that since the close of the Dwapara Yuga and the commencement of Kali, all the people of Bharat should, in the pres , day iv cribed narration of time and place in conneciion with their normal daily ritua], thenceforth subslitute, Kali Yuge, Pradhama Pade (the first quarlerof Kali) for Dwapara Yuge, Thuriyapade (the fourth quarter of Dwapara). On the first in the month of Chai_ tra in the year Pramadhi, which was & Friday at 2-27'-30" the advent of Kali Was celebrated in this country with the performance of the prescribed ritu_ al8, gifts and sac1ifices. It was a sacred the firgt of a Yuga, (ie. Yugaadi) for Ahem sirce the Kali era commenced, the present in 1959, 5,060 years have passed: And the Western hislorians themselves have recognised the commencement of the Kali Era a8 a1 2-27'-30" hours on the Z0th of Febru- ary in B. O. 3102 in their Christian Era. This has been accepted without any qvestion by all the Evrop- ean Hietoriang of our country from Sir William Jones who laid tke foundations in 1774 A. Dfor the prevai_ modern hislory of Ancient India down to Vini- cent Smith who wrote in 1915. 36 years before it i.0., in 3138 B 0 should be accpbed naturally a8 the time of the Mahabharata war. While the evidence is SQ unambiguously available in our Mahabharcta which we hold a8 sacred as the Vedas, to ignore if and t0 suggest various dates baged on various conjecturos aId theories for lhe date of the Mahabharata war is preposlerous: The 'Sage Vyasa' hes recordcd in the Mahabharata itself that ho began the compcsition of the poon in the year 1 of Kali and completed it in 3 years. Wlen the Wz 1 described by him is accopted as historical; why &lould the dale of it menlioned in it be discarded? If they had recognised the dale of the Mahabharata war a8 36 years before Kali,a8 itis meniioned in the poem and calculated the times of day day, day upto ling the reigns of the kings of the several dynasties that ruled over the different kingdoms in the country according to the Matsya, the Vayu the Brah- manda, the Vishnu and the Bhagavata puranas; the true history of ancient India could have been ascer- tained long ag0 and established . But the puranas and otherhistorical writings of iho country have been discarded a8 un-reliable and inscriptions, coins, buil- dings, the accounts of foreign visitors have been accepted and declared 38 more reliable and reelly authentic sources fo1 ou1 history, oven after & centu ry of laborious rasearchos, we have not been able L0 fix the date of the Mahabhara La war, the corner ston of Ancient Indian history on the bagis of any clear and cogent evidence. Without any such waste of time and energy money, etc with an elementary equipment for historical study could have digcovered it in an hour from the Mahabharata and the Puranag: The foreign hislorians were inlerested in reducing the antiquity of the literature and civilisa- tion of Bharat and for that purpose to push up the time of the Mahabharata War as far &8 pogsi] towarls modern times: Hence they did not tackle the problem 80 fer; and now that the false his- tory of ancient Bharat, concocted them hag been established in the country and firmly rooted in the minds of the studonts who have been taught the same in schools and colleges; now the question of the date of the Mahabharata war is taken up ard attempts are being made to fix it some-where betweon 1500 B. @. to 900 B. @. If itis 2 genuine 2) and and ble, by Vi atlempt to ascertain the iruil, how is it there is no invitation to the scholars in the tradilional lore of the country, to produce if they can, any reliable verifiable evidonce in their possession concer- ning the matter: It is 2 problem which can be solved, if even by refcrence to the indigenous lite- rature of the country in Sanskrit and nover by the Wesbern historians Cr their Indian disciples, with lheir utter ignorance of all knowledge of Sanskrit How i8 itno notice i8 taken of publicelions in which it i8 openly declared that the hisiory of Ancient India taught in our schools and colleges, is falee and concocted: How is it ihe challenge i8 not acce- pted, the conclusions dlisputed 01 the arguments refutedl ? How is it the authors of such publica- tions are not consulted in the pregent endeavour t0 ascertain the date of the Mahabharata war 2 When the recordedl histories of Magadha, Kashmir and Nepal the epics and puranas of the land, all declare the time of the Maha- bharata War unequivocallyand unanimously, where is the need for searching for other evidence for it. Why this pathetic clinging to the false dotor- minations of the Western, European gcholars ? The propaganda carried on by the Euro- pean historical scholars among the students in our colleges is clearly expoged by Maha-mahopadhyaya Dr. Haraprasada S:stry, M: 4,, Phd,, who writes from experiencne. aIn the eighties, my European friends advised me not to touch the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Puranas fo1 the purpose of getting Indian and and vii hislory from them. They worked hard with coins, inscriptions, nolices of foreign travellerss archae- sculpture, architecluie, for extracting chro- nologv history from thiem: In fact {hey st1- died every thing but the p1ran3s. But hol Mr: Pargiter and Mr: Jcycswal now produce & chronc- from the puranas themselves which agrees in outline with the one prepared with +0 much Loil of nearly 150 years by the orientc[islg. (Vides J. B 0. R: S. Vol XIV P. P. 325, 326). But ovr Indian historians have not paid :y 1eed t0 the advice an regrets expressed so eloquently hy hin: They continue to cling Lo the ways &rd nethods of thle European historians. Thoy have not ventured L0 dliscard thon and i0 attempt to construct the hislory of their own counlry baged on 2 study of the national literature in the epics and puranas: The minds of those destined to err Gannot be brought back to the right path: We may have to wait further for auspicious times for the true history of Bharat: According to the evidence available in our epics and puranas, the date of the Mahabharata war is 36 years before Kali. Now, ie-, by A. D 1959, we are in the 5060th Yoar of Kali: So reckoning on the Christian era, the date of the Mahabharata war works out to 5096-1958 (elapsed year) 3138 B. C. 'This is the correct determination inwhich there can be no change: But sone of the nodern scholars are of opinion that it may be fixed at 1500 B. 0 Or some other date. be a]g0' means may not be and we argue, should not be. Such opiniong are mere conjectures and can never amount to deterniina- tions: That alone is truth which does not vary Jogy, end logy May viii from time to time 01 from place to placc, accor - ding to our traditional intellectual standards: By the Sruti we hear #Thrikala badhyam Satyam, Badhyam Midhya "faatetat& va&, ate frev" ) . That which remaing unchanged through the past, the present and the future, that alone is the truth: That which changes is only an illusion i. 0_ that which appears to be till it is enquired into and disappears on investigation of its nature. Modern hislory, i. 0., the ancient hislory of India of our modern higtorians is all such an illusion 8 false strnctvre which cannot stand critical scru- tiny. Rao Bahadur P. V. Kane, who presided over the Indian History congress at Waltair in 1953 went wronz in interpre the 3rd verse in the 13 th chapter of the Brihat-samhita and arrived at tho date 2448 B. C. for the time of the Mahabharata War: The author (of this book) had even then expoged the mistake in the interpretation of the verse in his publication #Indian Fras" For a detailed criticism of the interpretation of the verse, reference may be made t0 the VI chapter in this volume. Therc can be no other true hisvory of the 1 } Mahabharata war than the 6Mahabharata" and the puranas by Vyasa who had witnessed the war and recorded the events a8 he witnessed then in his immortal writings: The evidence to tne contrary advanced by the Western scholarg is all hearsay evidence. It cannot be acceptable to true hietoriang- Messrs: V. B: Athorvel (Kirlaskar Wadi, Satara Digtrict), Dr. Kali Nath Nag, Taraknath Bhatia- ting ix charya have fixed the date of the Mahabharata war at B @. 3102 and Dr. Fleet at B. C. 3146, M Troyer; Dr. Kuppayya, T. 8. Narayana Sastfy; B A. B. M, Krishnamachary, A. Somayajulu, Nadimpalli Jagannadharao, Rallabhandi Subbarao, M. 4,, B. Ed,, O. P. Vaidya and many others have proved with irrefutable arguments and proofs that it is B. O. 3138. In the determinationg at B @. 3102 and 3146, there i8 @ little discrepancy from the truth but a8 the discrepancy ig so slight, we extend our congratulations {0 tl1o sponsors of the dates also for approaching the truth: Ever since tho Western historians, with the deliberate intention to reduce the antiquity of the civilisation and culture of Bharat, began their attempts to bring down the time of the Mahabharata war nearer to modern times, and along with it a8 & consequence the times of the literary works and the greater personalities of ancient Bharat and advanced the fantastic theories that the Maha- bharata' wJ8 & composition of the &th centvry A. D., and the Rigveda of a thougand years earlier; and published them about the middle of the 19th century, keen regentment had been felt and spir- ited protests uttered pathetic Indian gcholars. This dispute thus started a century ago. The late Justice Triambakatelong;_ who i8 noted for his sobreity and open mindednegs in Indological research; writes:- 6It appears to me, I confe8s, that it is these 'likings' and 'gatisfactiong' 'forgone conclu- siong lying in the back of most of the logical 3) L by and artillery which the European scholars have brou - ghtto bear upon the chronology of OU1 ancient litera- ture, it is this that is demporarily doing damage to its antiquity. Not only hypothesis have been formed on the weakesk possible collection of faictso but upon such hypothesis further smperstruclures of speculalion a1e raised. And when this is done, the essential weakness of the hase is effeclnally kept out of view." But the Weskern scholars enjoyccl the advan- tage of the prestige of the ruling 1ac0 the patronage of the government. Thoy could therefore brush aside the prolesis of the Indian scholars and to incorporate their fanciful theories and fantastic argumenis into the textbooks pres- cribed for schools and colleges in the COUnlIY, npon which the Indian youth were brought up and t0 treat; with indifference and even derision the historians (and their writings) who attempted L0 construct the true history of the country on the bagis of the ancient literature his'orical writings: Truth will be ascertained only after & dispagsionale study of the two sides t0 any conlroversy. The desire to study the arguments of the other party, to meet the arguments discuss the velidity of the arguments 01 either side and to arrive at the truth is conspicuous its absence amlong OUr' modern historical scholars. They cling to their false histories and refuse to take the risk of expo- sing Lhen to criticism discugsion: There are three historical sources for deter- mining the true and correct time of the Maha- bharata war indieputably. The first of them is and and and by and xi the history of Magedha: It is available in our Puranas. This is now usually considered the his- of Bharat In this we find the Jists of the kinge and ruling dynasties of the kingdom of Magadha in unbroken sequence beginning with 36 years before Kali i. 0., B. @. 3138. The lists 010 found in the writings (the Puranas) of Sri Vyasa himself who was an eyewitness to the Maha- hharata war. The second i8 thle history of Kashmir. This gives 18 the lists of kings that ruled over Kashmir beginnig with about 300 years before the Mahabharata war which it fixes at 36 years before kali or 3138 B.C. The accounts of the reigns of the different kings and dynasties in their his:ories by contemporary scholars have been strung together in this history. Atlempts to con- struct a continuous history on their basis had beon made in the past by ag many ag twelve authors: Some of these compositiong incorporate traditional infornation and hearsay reports here and there wivh the original accounts by contem- poraries Therefore, there are variations and conflic- ting accounts in some parts among their twelve hislories. So, Kalhana & scholar of comparatively roconi; times, collated them, compared them with ono another with ingcriptions of the kings and other historical material available to him, oschewed the doubtful and conflicting portions and evolvod & cogont, consistent &rd conlinuous his- tory of Kashmir: But the modern scholars have attrihuked Lo him wilful changes and exaggerations and edlelilions Lo the lists of kings, their time and tory ond xii the time8 of their reigns and edited tkem in their own way and out of all recognition with the original: The third source is the hislorv of Nepal which begins 1000 years before the Mahabharata war and gives us lists of the kings and their reigns with dates on the Kali Era. AIl the three sou- rces have been tampered with freely, edited misinterpreted modern historians to suit their prejudices and to corroborate their theories of the reduced antiquity of the Mahabharata war. It i8 the books written by such Western sclolars and their disciples that are studied in oUr schoolg and colleges: Hence the true history of Bharat has not been available to our youth: The basis of a true and correct history of Bharat is the time of the Mahabharata war. It i8 essential to asce- rtain and place beyond doubt this corner stone of the chronology of ancient Indian history. Hence, an attempt i8 made in this volune under diffe- rent Topics, to fix the time of the Mahabharata war in 36 years before Kali or 3138 years blefore Ohrist, and to establish beyond any doubt the correctness and the determinalion on the basis of all the evidence available in our epics and puranas, indigenous historical records and writings, agtronomical treatises and inscriptions etc. VIJAYAWADA A UT A0 R. 6-11-1959 and by such THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR T 0 P I C . I INTERNAL EVIDENCE The events that led Lo the War A Great Prince name Santana, belonging io the Lunar 12c0 of Kshatriyas was ruling at Hastinapura during the period of transition from the Dwapara to tho Kali Yuga about 300 ye8rg before Kali i. @., 3401 P. C. He had two sons, Bhishma by his first wife 'Ganga' and Vichitra Virya, hy his second wife Satyavadhi' . The devoted son Bhishma, renounced his right Lo the succession Lo the tbrone, desisted from marriage and romained 2 life long bachelO1, io please his father: His stop-brother Vichilra Viraye, who tkere- fore succeeded Santana to the throne, in his tiin hogot two sons. The elder of the two, Dl:ita - rashtro was born blind, therefore (lisqualificd 1,0 succeed to the throne according to laW. So the right to the throne devolved on his younger brother Pandu. But out of his regard and consi- deration for his elder brother; Pandu placed hinl on the #hrone nominally and carried on the admini- stration on his behalf: A princess name Gandhari (dlaughier of the of Gandhara), choose lo marry the blind King Dhrit?r:shtra Ske we s guch & devoled and exemplary wife that she lived blind-folded 1o the end of her life to avoid for horgelf the privilege of sight; denied to her hugband. She had a hundred song by Dhritarashtra. They a10 the well-known one 1) by and by king 2 THE AGE OF THE MAHABKHARATA WAR hundred Kauravas of tho Maha-Bharata: The prince Pandu begot five sons; Yudhishtirz and his illustrious brother8, the Pandave8. While the Pandavas were still in their boyhood, Pandu retired to the forest for austerities and passed away there: Bhishma sent for the Pandavas and arranged for the coronalion of Uhle five Pandavas along with tho hundred Kimrav 8 at Has sinapura. The nalicious KaurAVA,S {riecl number of wty8 80 bring the Pandavas to ha1 m bnt failed in &11 #hcir attempts: At lost on th1o edlvice of (Vedla Vyasa;' dlivided his kingdom inio two part;s, handed over one half, that of his deceased brother to the Pandavas; an kept the other half for himgelf, to be administcred by his eldest son, Duryodhana whon he nominated the crown prince. Yudhishtira, the eldest of tho Pandava princes ruled over the half of the kingdom that fell to his share with Indlr-Prastha (or Sakra-Prastha) 28 his capital: His reign at Indra-Prastha commenccdl in tha 75 th year before Kali (i. 0., B. C. 3177). In that year the Saptarshi Mandala the constellalion of the Great Beal crossed over inlo the region of 1he Siar Magha. It remains in the Magha for 26 hundrocl yoars from 3177 B. 0. befora crossing Ovar into the region of the next star on the Zodiac. Up till now Hagtinapura wa s the capital of & kinglom The land of the Kurus was just ono of the many soparate kingdoms of Bharat: But the Pandavas conquered with the might of their arms & numbor of other kingdoms, added considerably do their inherited territory and ruled ovor 2 vast empire extending over the entire Bharat and even beyond the river Sindhn on the west and the Himalayas 01 only. INTERNAL EVIDENCE 3 tle north, including the frontier Kingdoms of Yona, Hare, Huna, Romaka, Bahlika (Bactria), Darada, Turushkasihan (Turkistan), Sakasthan EastPersia) and other territorios occupied by ihe Mlechcha (ox-conmuniceted Hindu Kshatriyas} prirces and included in the frontiers of ancient Bharat: The eldest Pandava prince, Yudhistira thus became tho Emperor of the entire Bharat, performing the Rajasuya Sacrifice, the Aradlitional test of suzerainty. Duryodhana, iheir cousin of Haslinapura was filled with envy at the glory earned by the Pandavas, invited Ywdhishtira to 2 gamc of dice, and with the help of his uncle Sakuni, who was 21 adept at the game, defeated him in the game. Accor- ding to tho rulos of the game, the specified stskes for' which the gane was played, wcre obliged to spend a period of 12 years; along with their wife, the illustrious Drovpedi, in Ake forcgt azd #nother year after that, somewhere in disguise without being detecled and if they happened Lo be detected before the year was completed, again 26 period of 12 years in the forost and s0 on, their empiro to be returned to them when the term of exilo Was successfully completed. Thus for a {ime Duryodhana became the emporor by virtue of hig snnccess in Iho game of dicc, 10 which he managed to entico Yudhighlira, a1d 110 act of valoul or conquest 01 his part: But when the Pandavas fulfilled the conditions laid down, compleled the tern of 12 years of exilo in the forest, 1 year of exile in cognito, and claimed their empire, he refuged to return it to them: This was tho roson for the Great war. and by and TKE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR On account of the consideration that Bhishna had been & honoured prince at the Kaurava court from the beginning, ever since the times of Santana and Pandu; he participaled in the wJr 01 the side of the Kauravas. He was 236 years at the time of the war and he was elder to Veda Vyasa by about 20 years; Yudhishtira was 91, Bhina 90, Arjuna 89, and the twins Nakulo and Sahaed eva 88. Sri Krishna was of the same ago 2 8 Bhima, i.e., 90 year8. The Kauravas and al2 tkeir supporters were destroyed in thc Great war. All the five Pandavas won the victory and survived: 36 years after tle Bharata Wal, the entiro Yadava race, to which Sri Krishna belonged, fell & prey to internecine quarrels and perished fighting with one another &i; the Prabhasa Tirtha. Sri Krishna survived the Mahabhalata wal for 36 yoars, i.0., lived up to the &g0 of 90 + 36 126 ycars &nd in his 126th year shuffled off hig carnal It i8 S0 recorded in the Mahabharata' 'Sri Veda Vyasa' . The batile at Kurukshetra wa8 confined L0 18 only. On the 19th al1 the ladies of the royal family of the Kauive8 proceeded Lo the battle field along with Kunti, the mother cf the Pandavas, and Gandhari, the mother of Kauravag, for 2 last sight of the corpses of their husbands, song and other relations. Gandhari wag over- whelmed with grief for the loss of all her gong and in 2 fit of uncon{rollable anger inlo which her grief threw her; cursed Sri Krishna in the following terms in the 25th1 chapter dealing with Gandhari' s curse in Stri Parva of the Mahabharata 19 in the verses 43, 44, 45 and 46. aged body by days day INTERNAL EVDENCE J&t I| qeHTr9KrTretat MIT4: grriaat: aqfaa1a Mfac &rHTT "Tat Tfeouft Il (26-43) rawcytfrwa 7q tafar #JTT aa7narataTay qag7iaa7r: 11 25_44) gfaaatcgqr4d fat; &tatotRt Tarcaa 87gat sifaafaat: MI (25_45) Fzv -frafqoftt Tea #rafttv: MI (25_46 ) Cist of #he cvrse SOh ! Madhusudana, YOU have looked on nnperturbed while Pandavas and Kauravas who were cousing, fought among themselves and perished: So will also be & deslroyer of (your) cousing. In the 36 th year to cone after witnegsing, help- lessly the destruction of all your sons, nobles and cousins, you will be obligod to wander in the forest he yourself destroyed in an ignoble manner. The Yadava ladies shall grieve as the Bharata ladies are now grieving _ Such were the words of the curge pronounced the lady in her grief and indignation at the sight of the corpses of all her near and dear on the battlefield: 36 years after the (the 19 th after the commencement of the Mahabharata wer) according to the curse, the Niryana, demige, of Sri Krishna wag predicted to occur. Accordingly it happened: In the 36 th year after the Maha_ bharata war the Yadava rac0 perished and Sri Krishna passed away and from the moment of the 2) faza yoz and by day dav THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR Niryana of Sri Krishna the advent of Kali Yuga is recognised and the years On the Kali era reckoned and nOW in April 1959 of the Christian era, (the first day of the first half of Chaitra in the year Vikari) we have completed 5060 years on the Kali Era and entered on the 5061st year, 36 years before the commencement of Kali, standing in grief on the battle field, in the midst of the corpses of her children the noble lady Gandhari pronounced the curso on Sri Krishna _ So it is J}OW 5060 36 5096 years since tho Great War look place. The War occured in (5096_ 1958 A. D 3138 B. @.) It is now recognised on 8l1 hand s, all over the world that the Kali Era comm- enced at 2-27'-30" hours on the 20 th of February in 3102 B. C. The Kali Era commenced with the Niryana of Sri Krighna. So it; ig clear the Great War which occured 36 years before the demise of Sri Krishna, i. 0., 36 years before Kali should be daled 3138 B. @. This is the correct determina- tion on the internal evidence available in the Mahabharata itself, directly in the story of the War. Further other confirmatory ovidence avail- able in the Mahabharata in several other parts for instance in the lst chapter of the Mausala parva, verses 1, 7, &, 9 and 13 say :- Rt || qeftt <aq datcat &q" #raied: varf-faqrlatfa Fafttifa gafiar: M (Aeo 1.-1 ) #rufzd #T34 grrroi gfafoar: Teraafemttv #av tizTv (1 (1_7) a10 dav INTEANAL EVIDENCE R&1 11 fagaa PTcaTrI- qit: aaiTutawaia 7Tz_ { faafrountr ga M1 (1_8) 11 qrrttaHTVTZ aaa3avT-DaTT 1 Toutfaas3irat STat aqfeatrizatwat M1 (1_8) Trq1att Jata 2 Vyasampayana says : S&t |i wefareadlaq" Tcoataayarit aiyly TavFag favez: #Tatifaat: Ii (1_13) dist of the verses 'As the 36th year after the war and the curse of Gandhari approached, Yudhishtira obser- ved many evil omeng. At the same time he came to know of the annihilalion of the entire Yadava race due to internecine quarrel; and mutual slaughter on account of the strange sMusalam"' which resul- ted from the curse of the sages whom they happ- ened to ingult On hearing the news of the death of Balarama and likewige of Sri Krishna, Yudhi- shtira summoned all his brothers and conveyed the sad newg to them and they all tried to con- sole one another for the calamity. Thus the nar- rator Vysampayana narrated the story to King Janamejaya that scin the 36th year after the Maha- bharata War the warriors of the Yadava, Vri- shni, Bhoja and Andhaka rac08 al] perished in the mutual slaughter occasioned the fata] 'Musalam' Again in the Pnd chapber of Mougala Parva W0 find in the verses 18 io 24 : 71gavv by 8 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR rot |i gaqz47 €dtar rrgrea: #roqitt Tuiarut #uraTui ai 3oat ATaatfad Ii (2_18) 9vaat $74 <Ig9T 97' 9rea srraya 5aT7TJ8414T: i (2_19 fayriatTo & qfrfacy Gar-: 1 AA TTQ &azfvvi 7qa #fatat: (2_20) [eritstfiiaar "ar-t 8aaieat: Tagayreratriaf afad #IATTAQ II (2_21) 5at aaz9a #ataryfafezr: grTaya6a-85 ?r2aittatT Tatrott (2_22) TryTrat Tyaarg frtif: #rtaaq 3TITTHTTTV Teta4417T #ftat: 1 (2_23) 3T9t0qr7t TT #tTtttTta mqum7iagaa: #Ny & grodtr: I1 2_24 Gist of the verges ; Sri Krishna noted the ominoua circ mstanccs of the solar eclipge on 13th of the second fortnight of the month; the l4th day having lapsed and the 13th and l5th occurring together on the same jugt 28 it happened on the occasion of the Mahabharata war, and reflected sthe same omens were obgerved at the time of the Maha- bharata war, in which the entire race of Bharata perished, perhaps the Yadava race will perish now And he recollected the curge of Gandhari and further reflected. 6It is now 36 years since the Mahabharata war_ Perhaps the `prediction in her curse ig coming true: The omeng obgerved at the rgart grat day day, INTERNAL EVIDENCE time of the war according to the report of Yudhishtira are all to be observed nOw- Let the Yadavas perish at a gacred place"' . He resolved, and arranged for the movement of all the males of the Yadava and allied tribes to the Prabhasa Tirtha for the 'Suryoparaga Snana (bath) . Again in the Maha Prasthanika Parva WB find in the description of the action taken by the Pandavas on receipt of the news of the distruction of the Yadavas eic- Vysampayana says in verses 2, 6 to 9 of chapter I. Q71 ii rata#trattttt Twaf #aatet 5r4iaafarterz ivrta Rada Ii (1_2) TryIaTIT4 9a77 trftttut rrotrfzaat daar41g yfefezr: ii (1_8 ) afatfted tatto4t Tarv qfrfetat g aTafiamatat gwzt qiaatvj: II (1_7) QryAFYAJA: gvrToth #faoafa qs7i cftattst attttttt 37*74: (1_8) qafetztfraag? 75989 qiau: 1 a5rtstt saaneniutararq TT:g4t ii (1_9) Gist of tlie vers0s : 'On receipt of the news of tlle destruction of the Yadava, Vrishni and Andhaka otc., Iribes, Yudhi- shtira resolved to renounce the world and g0 on pilgrimage and addressing Arjune, said SI have resolved lo renounce the world and go on pilgri- 3) 10 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR mage. So for Yuyuthsu the son of Dhritarashtre by his Vygya wife and entrust the administration of the empire to him and instal Parikshit 98 the king of the Kurus: Then he turned to the grief stricken wife of Arjuna, 'Subhadra' and said 'the son of your son 'Parikshit' will be the king of the Kurus, YOr nepew Vajra;' the son of Aniruddha the son of Sri Krishna i. @- Sri Krishna's grandson, will be the king o the surviving Yadavas Parikshit will rule at Hastinapura The Yadavas will stay at Tndra-Prastha. Vajra will be their king: You will have to look after him. You should not; think of J3 accoampanying Us. Just at fhe moment Sahadeva approached smiling and said in the verges 19 to 27 of the lst chapter of the Mahaprasthanika Parva sMischievous practices and quarrels are arising among men due {o their avarice, in sales purcha - 8es, and encroachments on the neighbourer's lands: Injustice h1as set in: 'Kali seemg to he a1 work' . Yudhightira heard the words and fell diegns _ ted with life and said swe have lived long enough: We ghould not stay here any longer,' and removed al1 the costly jewels and clothes on his body, changed into homespun and the brotherg and Droupadi followed his example. They wero all ready to start 011 the great pilgrimage, the final jorney, with the gacred fire in their handg. They presented exactly gme picture a8 whon they had formerly started for the exile of 12 years in the forest: The women of the palace were aLl filled with grief at the sight But the brothers Droupadi were rejoicing, for their part: The five Pandavas, Droupadi, their congort; and a accompanying them, all started from Hastinapura. send anl and and dog INTERNAL EVIDENCE 11 The same account of the destruction of the Yadavas and the advent of Kali, with 36th year after the Mahabharata War in the Mahabharatam in the Telugu rendering by the three great Andhra poets and in the Devi Bhagavatha, ?nd Skandha, page 60 of the rendering in Telugu by Vidwan Saripella Viswanadha Sastry, M. A. In the face of such clear, unambiguoug and unanimous evidence everywhere in the ancient literature of Bharata which proves that the Maha- bharata War occurred in the 36th year before Kali (3102 B. C) i. 0. 3138 B. C,. and that Sri Krighna pagged &way in 3102 B.O and Yudhightira and hig hbrothers in 3077 B.C, to ignore them all, and to conjecture that the war might have occurred 1600 years after Kali, jg gacrilegious: THE AGE OF IHE MAHABHARATA WAR TOPIC II INTERPOLATIONS IN KALHANA'S RAJATARANGINI Once itis accepted that the Kali era commenced, with the moment of the demise of Sri Krishna in B. @. 3102, it is obviously unwise and imperti- nent to attempt to locate the date of the Maha- hharata War somewhere sone centuries after the begining of the Kali era. It has necessarily to be attributed to a mischievoug intention to deceive the Hindus and put them on the wrong track: To participate in the war at the time thus fixed for it by the modern scholars according to their misleading history, it should be necessary for Sri Krishna to come down once again from his per- manent abode in heaven: Is it not surprising that; the Indian historical scholars of modern timeg also should join in the endeavour to gearch for date for the Mahabharata War some time later in the Kali era, after it is accepted by one and al1 that the commencemont of the Kali era and the event chiefly responsible for it and synchro_ nising with it, the demige of Sri Krishna who played 2 prominent part in the war, was in 3102 B. C? How is it, it doge not strike them a8 an unwige and useless endeavour: This thoughtlesg imitation 0f the westren historians is only a proof of their blind allegiance ingrained in thom to their western mnasters, and utter lacking respect for the native historical literature of the country. INTERPOLATIONS IN KALHANA'S RAJATHARANGINI 13 But one apparently formidable objection may be raised to the point of view adumbrated in thege pages by a reference to verse 51 of chapter I of Kalhana'g Rajatharangini, the source of Kashmir history where it is recorded that the Pandavas and Kauravas were alive in Kali 653. Here is the answer to the objection for which the oarnest attention and dispassionate consideration of the reader is invited. The verse in question could not have been Kalhana' g. It must have been due to interpolation or tampering with the text. It is further our contention that not only this verge I_51 but the verses I-_49, 50, 54 &10 all due t0 such inter- polation: They ar0 directly contrary 10 the trend of Kalhana' g views. Dr: Buhler procured & mant- script copy of Kalhana's Rajatharangini in Kashmir took it ove1 to England fol getting it printed. The interpolations wero most probably effected at tho time, while the manuscript wDS being printed in England: Kalhana says in the verees I-55, 56 of his Rajatharangini that the constcllation of the Great Bear moves in tho rogion of each star for 2 hundred yoars, accepting the autkority of the views of Vriddha Garga Varaha Mihira their calculations of the movement of the Great Bear, and declaras that during the reign of Yudhi- shtira the constellation w88 in Magha. Yudhi- shtira' s reign extended from 75 Years before Kali i. 0. 3177 B. 0,, t0 3077 B C. This will be establighed with proofs &1d delailed explanations in the pages to cone in chapter VI of thig volume in connection with the discussion of 4) and and for 14 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR 'Aasan Maghaasu Munayaha' "eTaT AITTg I-56 of Rajatharangini and XIII-3 of Brihat Samhit to which reference may be made. How could tl:e same Kalhana in the same trealiso dleclare Yudhi- shtira to be reigning in 3177 B. C. in one verse 56, and in Kali 653 01 2448 B. C. in another verse 51, two contradictory statemenis in #he SO,210 breath? If we concede him capable of such self-conlradiction inconsistency; his Ireatise should not he accepted 28 a reliable sourc0 of history. He has employed a8 the basi8 for his work the era known variously 98 the Iaukikabdla , Yudhishtira Kala, the Sapt-rshi nana, the Kashmirabda, which began in' Kali 26, 01' B. @. 3076. If the Kavravas the Pandavas had been alive in Kali 653 01 B. @. 2448, kow could he base his hiskory on the secular C1:} con mencing in B. C. 3076 with the ascent io heeven of Yudlhishtira? According Lo the account in Kalhana 8 Rajatharangini Gonanda-I, of K?shmir joined with Jarasandha in his invasion of Madhur, before the Mahabharata war; and was killed in the battle Balarama. His gon Damodara-I attempted 1.0 digturb the Swayamvara funclion of 2 princess of Gandher and W? 8 destroyed in that connection, by Sri Krishna himgelf. His son Gonand;-II became the of Kashnir in 3140 B. @. while he w2s 2 in 3138, B. 0, in the Mahabharata war. All the tribu- tary princes in the country rnnged themgelvos on one O1 other of the two sides in the war: But, says Kalhana a8 Gonanda-II of Kashmir wa8 2 minor in his teens, his participation in J7v?' and and king long by king boy yet; INTERPOLATIO VS / V KALHANA'S RAJATHARANGINI 15 the war was not solicited by either of tke two parties to it, the Kauravas and the Pzndeveg. In proof of his 8 ':lement we mlay &lso nole that nowhere in the account of tke Mahablereta wa * in the 'Malabhara{a' is there any mention of an army of Kashmir: The Pandavt s accompanied by their consort Drsupedi commenced tkeir 9 scent to heaven (Swarg: rolcna) in Kali 25 01 B.C. 3077. At that time, in momory of the gread emperor Yudhishtira, in Keli 26 or B. @. 3076, 011 thio first in the fist ha] f of C}itia whcn thc constoll- ation of the Great Be:1' crossed over fron UEe region of the Magha to tlt of the next slal on €7.0 Zodiac, 2 new era was foundod ca] led Ihe Sapt 1shimana (era), the Yudhishtira Kal? , Laukikabla 01 tke Kashmirabda. So t1.o Lh0o1y that Yudhightira and his brothers wko pe ssed cWay in R. 0. 3076 lived later than in Kali 1600 (01' 15 th cenbury B. 0.) snd nade Wal 01 tko Kalrevc 8 is D fandlastic theory. According to Our Puranas &nd Mahabharala Sahadeva, son of Jc1rsandk:a, King of Magadha, was killed in the Mahabl arata war in B. C. 3138 and then hig son Somadhi WZ S crowned kingof Magadha at Girivraja the capital of the stale. Somadhi was the of Magadha and conlemporary of Yudhishtira at Hastinaapura till the of Dwapara. He survived Yudhishtira and Dwapara and coniinued Lo reign in Magadha for ?2 years in Kali 08 the contc nporary of Parikshit at Histinapura. He Iuled on he whole for 58 years: Sri Pargit31' has adopled tho same account in hig 'Dynasties of the Kali Age' . Hence, it is quite clear the Mahalharata War occurred in 3138 B. 0. towards the close of Dwapara, 36 yea18 beforo the heginning of Kali. When it is accepted Ulat tho Kali began on the demige of Sri day 122, king eccl Yuga 16 TKE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR Krishna in 3102 B. C. and even the western hig_ torical scholars do not dispute this, it is ipso fac O, accepted that the Mahabharata war in which Sri Krishna played the most prominent part occurred 36 years before his demise i, e. in 3138 B. C. They stand commitled to the determinalion and they are aware of it. But, inspired the unholy intention to reduce the antiquity of the ancient history of Bharat, they do not admit it And to induce and encourage our Indian historical scholars to search for the dale of the Mahabharata war in the later centuries of Kali, they have interpolated I-51 of the Rajatharangini into the manugcript copy at the time it wag being printed in London and on the strength of it, initiated the mischievor$ theory. The Indian higtoriang, their disciples, havo not been able to 8e0 throngh this nischiof crdl are deceived. Hence, the dote of the Mahabharala war has becone 2 tough problem for them. If only 2 ray of lhe truth should penelrale their innocent mind, it will be quite clear to them that the Great war took place in 36 yearg before Kali 01' 3138 B. @. # by THE AGE OF IHE MAHABHARATA WAR TOPIC III THE YudhIsHTIRA SAKA For 2 valid reconstruction of the history of ancient Bharat or for the correct determination of the times of the several great personalities of ancient Bharat, it is quite necessary to fix the date of the commencen) of the era known as the Yudhishtira saka. After the Mahabharata battle (which was waged for 18 dayg) came to 2 c]ose; on the 28th after the commencement of the battle. Yudhishtira w2g crowned 28 sole Emperor of Bharat From that time onwards the times of events have been recorded on the sYudhi_ shtira Rajya Kala" the new era named after the great Emperor and commencing with the date of his Coronation a8 the undisputed sole Emperor of Bharat, after the close of the Great War: In Jater times the same era has been sometimes called 'Yudhishtira Saka " So the Yudhishtira Saka or periods of time measured on the Yudhishtira saka (Era) are almost the same (except for the difference of 28 days) a8 the periodg ar0 reckoned from the time of the Mahabharata War. So to fix the Yudhi- shtira Saka the time of the Mahabharata war has to be ascertained and established firmly, in the firgt place. Among tlio ingcriplions of ancient times '80 far discovered in India, and published, about 99% belong Lo the Centuries of the Chrigtian Era (after Christ), and very few perhaps Only one ar0 two 5) ont day 18 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR have been discovered relating to kings after the Mahabharata wal; the Christian era. There is scope for apprehensions, in the circumstances tlla,t; inscriptions relating to very ancient; times about the time of the Mahabhaata wal might have been discovered actually, but suppressed or destroyed out of a deliberate intontion on the part af thoge concerned, to preveni, the discovery of tho true antiquity of the history of Bharat; strong rumours to that effect do prevail in the nation:- list circles in the country. It i8, on the face of it, absurd and impossible to believe that nono of the anciont kings of Bharat down to the time of the Mahabharata war i. 3138 B. C. hed thought of leaving even a single inscription behind recor- ding their achievements 01 gift8, while the numerove inscriptions discovered of the later times; after the Ohristian era themgelves reveal & common Iradition and custom of recording gifts and achievemonls even of the merchants and the common people in inscrip- tions inall parts of the country. There Can be no doubt that they had to their credit many such inscriptions and many such had been discovered in the archa - eological excavations carried out in the country in modern times. But they must lwave been, a]l of them, deliberately destroyed. Acbually there is proof of such a destruction of one inscription in the Ca80 of the Kumbhalagarh ingcription (V. 8 1517) found recently in five broken pieces in geveral places, which, put together are found to form one inscription. It must have been discovered entire, some iime earlier; broken ard the pieces deli- berately scattered in several places to prevent rediscovery. upto round and e-' THE YUDHISHTIRA SAKA 19 vide Article. "the fragmentary second slab of the Kumbhalagarh inscription V. 8. 1517 by Dr. G. N. Sarna, in the volume entitled proceedings of the fourteenth session, Jaipur; Indian Hislory Congress, 1951" . Dr. G. N. Sarma thus comments on the inscription: 0 The inscription under review, belonging to the Mamadeva' 8 temple of Kumbhalagarh, (this temple was built by Rana Kumbha in V.S. 1517 Or Sake 1382, A D. 1460) i8 in 3 form of 2 very small piece preserved in the Victoria Hall Mus- eunl, Udaipur: It8 present form doeg not help us tO deduce with accuracy a8 to why was the slab broken and who broke it ? However I have been able to discover the entire toxt of this migsed slab through the help of manuscript entitled "PRASASTHI SANGRAHA" of Saraswati Bhavan Library, Udaipur (For Prasasti Sangraha, 800 proceedings of the Indian Historical Records, Commission, Udaipur Session 1944, G. N, Sarma, & note on 'Prasasti Sangrha' pp. 73, 74). It consists of the trangcripls of thoso ingcriptiong of Rana Kumbha (V. 8. 1490-1525/1433-1468 A. D.) which originally belonged to the temple of Mamadeva at Kumbhalagarah and the Kirthistambha (the tower of fame) at Chitor' The transcriplion of tho second slab of Kum- bhalagarh' informs u8 that Bappa, a Brahnin of Anandapur (now called Arnoda), well versed, in learning, left his home with his trusty followers and came {0 Nagda' intho wild tractof Newar: He served 20 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR sHarit' who being pleased with him conferred upon him the dignity of a ruler: Here the qualifying phraso Kshipratara Prabodha Madhuranamdaika- nightal" favfagarralt #graatfaoa: introduces Bappa in a manner which affords no ground for doubting in Bappa' s origin a8 a Brahmin: This phrase explains the reason why all the writers have used 'Vipra' specifically for Bappa t0 show lis origin i. 0. from Brahmin dynasby. But in some of the epigraphs Bappa 01 his successors have beon referred to a8 Kshatriyas iti8 that Kshat- riyaship which he had acquired through Harita's favour: This is why for Bharatribhatta the succe s80r of Bappa, the Ohatsu inscription (Epigraphic Indica Vol. XII; P. 13) of the tenth century A. D_ uged the word 'Brahma Kshatri' a Brahmin admi- tted to the orders of Kshairiya: In epic timeg tho function of & Brahmin was of both learning and war 'Chaapena Sr.' ayenavaa'"#147 #qtat Hence the word (Dvija) according to Sanskrit etymology, may mean Kshatriya, or :Vipra' may mean one who sowg virtue, though it usually means & Brahmin and ix gcnerally used 28 such: History of later early age and carly mediaeval times ia full of examples of many ruling Kshatriya dynasties which trace their origin from Brahmins: Thus Bappa' 8 Brahmanic origin is in accord with the traditions of Our country' (The Fact that Bappa' s Brahmanic origin wag SO com Inonly believed that even Kumbha in his commentary of 'Gita Govinda' has not hesita- ted to call Bappa Brahmin: Right from 7th Cen- A.D:' to our own days' J} Bappa Brahmanic origin has been' a popular fact. Somali ingcription of (6Vipa tury THE YUDHISHTIRA SAKA 21 646 A.D, Aitpur ingcription of 977 A. D., Chatsu inscription of tenth Century A. D Rasiyaki chhatri inscription of V.8. 1331, Rayamal Inscription of V. 8. 1545 and many others have repeatedly declared Guhilots &8 of Brahnin origin: The same fact has also been mentioned mediaeval writers ]ike Nensi and Ranchoda Bhatta.- Such attempts of suppress- the true facts suggest that the destruction of the second slab was also a deliberate action of some body who did not like to gee such records exist:" Comment The Rajput princes known 28 Ranag were cll Brahiirs by ancestry. Tkeir founder Ba - pparana from wkom all the Ranas derive their desceni was 2 Brahmin and his ancestry ig all recorded in this ingcription: The European his- toriong of ancient Bharat built up fantastic baseless theory that the Ranas were all born of the foreign races of invaders, the Sakas Pallavas, Hunag, t0 the low caste native womon and that these warriors of low and mixed origin wore occorded the status of Kshatriyas and flattered a8 Brahma-Kshatriyas by the Brahming. These theo- ri08 wero incorporated in the histories compiled them and distilled into the minds of Ou1 youths for whom they were prescribed 38 text-books in schoole and colleges: The inscription under refe- rence contained evidence to the contrary, directly disproving their theories and upholding the tradi- tional view of the Ranag and Brahma-Kshatriyas or Brahmins who had adopted the Kahatriya mode of life. 'So thig inscription must have been deli- 6) by ing and by 22 The AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR berately shattered to pieces and thrown awa,y a8 soon 28 it was discovered ad first ard it was the separate pieces that were lstcr on discovcred by chance due Lo the misfortune of {h10 perpolralors of this act of vandalism, and put together and brought to light. It is verv likely that 2 similar fule Izcl befallon other ingcriplions relating to the very ancient tin38 rojnd abont the Mahabharata War of 3138 B. C, and after 3138 B. 0, to the beginning of the Christian Era. Within a month of the closo of tho Ml:a - bharata Wcr and the coronation of Yadhishtira €8 Emperor of Bharat, Parikshit was born. In tl1e 36 th yea1" a fterwardg Sri Krishna passed aWEy and from the moment of demige 2 hrs- 27 '-30" on the 20th of February in B. @. 3102 the Kaliyren comnmenced and events a10 reckoned on the Kali Eraa. Now 5060 years of the Kaliyuga ar0 ovC1 and wB ar0 in the 5061st yoar. It is 80 rccordcdl in our Annal Panchangas, naiive Oalenders in 780 in tho different paIts all ovor tho coun{ry. So 5060 36 01' 5096 years is the period that has elapged since the Y0?T in which the Mahabharata War took place, Parikshit was born, and the Ywdhi- shtira Era W8 fonded. So the date of the commencement of the Yudhishtira Era 01' of the Mahabharata War works out indisputably to 5096 ~ 1958 3138 B. @. AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR TOPIC IV CONJUNCTION OF SEVEN PLANETS AND PANCHANGAS (ANNUAL CALENDARS) Yudhishtira became the Emperor of Bharat after his victory in the Mahabharata War. In the 36 th year of his rule &8 Emperor; his cousin Sri Krishna who had been his strong support played 2 prominent part in the conduct of the war, passed away in Dwarska. The Puranas and the Maha - b__arata a18 all unwnimoud in declaring that the conmencement of the Kali Yuga is reckoned from the moment of the demise of Sri Krishna (ie., 3102 B. @.) The Vishnupurana in sloka 12-2-33 sayS 8 ~a1 || #AT Sotfal41a Fafinwaaatafa ( 9fa9wf #fvgi arzrwulfaalet II Kali Era i8 not & matler of guess work but is based on the solid foundations of Astronomical, Science. According t0 our As'ronomical scionce, the seven planets 1. Saturn; 2. Jupitar; 3. Mars, 4 Svn, 5. Venus, 6. Mercury and 7. Moon should in con- junclion (togetler) in the Mesha at the conmen- conont of the Kali Era i. 0., 5060 years back such 3 phenomenon occurred in 3102 B. C, at 2 hours 27 minntcs and 30 seconds on 20 th February- Tho Kali Era reckoned from that monent: (This 24 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR type of conjuction of the planets will recur again at the next such moment in the next Mahayuga in after 43, 20, 000 years). The well known French Astronomer sBailly and others admitted that thc conjunction of the planets described by 071 Hindu Astronomers occurred exactly correct; Lo the minule and second at the time noted by them: Prof. Oount Bjornsljerna says : 66 According to the Astronomical calculations of the Hindus, the present period of the world, Kaliyuga commenced 3102 yoars before the bir'h of Christ, on the 20 thi February, at 2 hours 27 minutes and 30 seconds, the dime being thus cal- culated t0 minules and seconds. They Say Uhae t; 2 conjunction of the planels then took place, aral their tables show this conjunclion. Bailly stales that Jupiter and Mercury were there in the same degree of the ecliptic, Mars at a distance of only eight, and gaturn of seven degrees; whenco ik follows, that at the point of time given the Brahmins a8 the commencement of Kaliyuga, tho four planets above mentioned must have been s7cc0- ssively concealed the Tays of the sun (Firet Saturn, then Mars, afterwards Jupiter and las'ly Mercury). They thus showed themgelveg in con- junction; and although Venu8, could not then be soen, it was natural 1o say thata conjunction of the planets then took place. The calculationg of the Brahmins i8 80 exactly confirmed by our own Agtronomical . tables,' 'that nothing but an actual by by CONJUNCTION OF THE SEVEN PLANETS 25 observation could have given S0 correspondert 2 result. (Vide Hinda Suneriori:y 2.2. ?52-484 by H:r 3ilw8 Szorc third editicr 1922.) PANCHANGAS (ANNUAL CALENDARB) All the Panchangas (Native Annual Calendars) in vogue in the different parts of Bharat in which thle positions and movements of the different planets and slars on the Zodiac during the year a1e recorded and their influence on the lives of human beings are predicted, have all been prepared yeal after year from times immemorial, and from the enliance of Kali reckoning the time on the Kali Era and adding up year after year: The Kali Era ig tho basi8 of all reckoning of time in tkese calendars: In the calendars for the current year sVIKARI" of A. D. 1959 it will be found stated that 5060 years have gone since the Kaliyuga commenced: The Mahabharata War is to be dated 36 years previous, to the advent of Kali ie , 5060 years back ie-, 5060 L 1958 A. D. 3138 B @- This i8 the direct deternination of the dale of the Mahabhsrata War on the basis of our Native Annual Oalendar8, which form a National Insti- tution in our couniry. da, by AGE OF THE MARABHARATa WAR TOPIC V. THE SAPTARSHI ERA In 2 native historical trealise, the 'Kali Yuga Raja Viittanta' (history of the kings of the Kali Yuga) it is stated : rat || rargfarfrz rirTor #z9r4 wfafeza: 7 darrady: 9rgrw1: fqgfzarar: II qavrafaatffut 914t3: vaafevt: T&ratt Tartat {igmf yfafoz? I1 66 When Yudhightira was crowned King at Indrapragtha, over his half of Kaurava kingdom carved out for the Pandavas, the Constellation of the Great Bear Or the Saptarshi Mandala entered the region of the star Magha, in the Zodiac.', and again; ' Sevenly five years before the commence- ment of the Kali Yuga, the Great Bear crogsed over into Magha i. in B. @. (3102 75 =) 3177. Yudhishtira's reign at Indraprastha there- fore commenced in B. 0 , 3177. The 75 years of his reign before Kali include 25 years of Suzerainty (Emperorship) over the whole of Bharat, which he enjoyed after the performance of the Rajaguya, the 13 yeals of exile a9 & congequence of his de- feat in the game of Dice, 38 years on tho whole, and the demand for the restoration of hig king- 0., SAPTARSHI ERA 27 dom a8 per the terms of the game at the end of the 13 years of exile, the refugal of Duyo- dhana to comply with the demand, and the War in 3138 B. C., {lie coronation 0f Yudhishtira again afier the War as the undisputed Eiperor of Bharat and the establishment of the Yudhishtira Era, 35 years of his rule after the War and the de- mise of Sri Krishna, the advent of Kali, his renunciation of the kingdom, enbrusting it to Pari- kshit and starting on the Great Journey, in 3101 B. C,, and there after it is stated 8 Rat || qvfavfaqqg 7aga8 #oigt 7 aarefucy <4r,qi, gatrarattt: Ii # After the passage of 25 years in the Kali i. 0, in B. C, (3102 = 25) 3077, the Great Bear in its retrograde motion, pagses on from Magha to Aslesha and remain in it for a hundred 4 years. and : rat |1 aaavtg-Tsfq Tatyrqta #rftaa: 7 Yaqfrwtra eavfarrlegfatat II "Then i. in B. @. 3077, Yudhishtira, after completing the Great Journey or Pilgrimage round the worid, ascends to heaven: 8 R6T |i 7aavtfeaToatsfy wrafar RaTart: MhgatTYaTe &aararqafaa: II Yuga 0., and 28 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR "Even thon, i. e, in B. @. 3077 ~ 76 Was in- augurated in memory of Yudhishtira, the Secular 9 ) Era variously cllcd tLaukikabda;' Saptarshimana, Yudhishtira Swargarohana Kala, the Kashmiralsdm, of 2 duration of 3700 yea18. From tke account; thus available to "78 in the Kaliyuga 7 Raja 4 Vrittanta; the dates of four well-known evenis 310 aihoritalively fixed for 28 1. The entry of the Great Bear inio Magha 3177 B. 0. 2 The time of the Mahabharata War or Yudhishtira Era. 3138 B. @. 3 The commencement of the Kali 3102 B. C. 4. The inavgvralion of the Saplarasl i Era, or Yudhshtira Swargarohana Kala, 0r Laukikabda or Kcshmirabda 3076 B. @. The fourth of these, called 'Laukikabda' because it was established by the people, Yudhi- shtira Kala, a8 it was established in memory of Yudhishtira' & Swargarohana Kala , and Kashmi- rabda a 8 it has been in voguo in Kashmir all along and usod the almanac makers 28 the bagis of their calculations from year to yeai: Kalhana, the author of the history of Kashmir, known a8 Raja Tarangini, hag used this Laukikabda 28 the basis of his chronology_ Yuga by SAPTARSHI ERA 29 Dr: Buhler the well-known European His_ torian himgelf has admitted the antiquity of this Laukikabda the validity of the recognilion of 1t8 starting point Kali 1 as equivalent to B. O. 3101. 6[ do not doubt for 2 moment, that the calculation which throws the beginning of the Saptarshi Era back to 3076 B. C., i8 worth no more than that which fixes the beg nning of the Kali Yuga in 3101 B. C. But it seomng to me certain that it is much older than Kalhana's time, because Ixis equalion 24 1070 agr008 with it. It may therefore be safely used for reducing with exact- ness #he Saptarshi years, months ard men- {ioned in his work to yenrs of tho Chrislian Era. The results which will he thus obtained will always closely agree with those gained:) Gen: Ounning- ham, who, did u80 the right key' (Vide pp 264-268 Indian Antiquary Vol VI of 1877 and p_ 27 ff of Vol V of the Edn: 1876.) Besides Dr. Buhler himself quotes the following verse in evidence of tle currency of the Soptarshi Era in Kashmir: R31 |I #oa: JT4f A79q: gfafzrret: fafay4nat: I #i#fe #aatryfvimyt &ufqwia Taafa da: II 66 Atter %5 years passed away in Kali, Yudhi- 99 shtira and his brothers ascended to heaven: Dr: Buhler has interpolated in the above vorse saafvavf:' #Saptarshivaryah" in the place of "gfafoarTat:' cYudhishtiradyah". But the emendation leads to no gensible meaning for the verse. For, the Saplarshis are always in heaven: There is no sense 8) and days by 30 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR in stating that they will be in heaven in Kali 25 , It is certainly sensible a1d meaningful to according to the other reeding, shat Yudhishtira and his brothers who had been on tho earth since 75 years before Kali ascended to hcaven, Or pa away from the earth, in Kalj 25. This is the version in the Puranas too. Dr. Buhier has effectcd the emendalion on his own authorily, deliberately render the verse consislent with Uhie verse sini- larly interpolated by him (1-51) in Kalhana' s Rajalarangini, sta that the Kurus ard the Pandavc: $ were all in existence in Kali 653. If it is esbablished that Yudhishtira and his brothers pagsed away in 25 Kali; the statement in the vorse interpolated the 1-51 of the Rajotaran- stands directly contradicted it. So, it i8 clear the emendation of "gfufoartet:' cYudhishti- radhyah" inlo "aeafqawf:" t Saptarshivaryeh" was nocessary for him to justify the other interpola- tion in the Rajaiar; (1-51). The Saptcrshis of the conslellation were never on the earth: They were manifested on the heavens at the begirning of the creation of the Universe o1" Srishti #long with the owher stars planets and they will disappea1' from the heavens only at the {ime of 'I.aya' 01 lotal destiuction of tho Universe. The planets of the exis universe a10 in their mid-creer: They will endure for another 220 crores of years according to Our As ronomical Science. To say that; the Saplarishis reached heaven or passed away from t1.0 earth in Kali 25 ig manifestly abgurd. Hence the correct re?ding of tko verse is with "gfaftatrat:' # sYudhishtiradyah" and not "acafqavf:" # Saptarshivcryah:" say , ssed ting by by gini ngini and ling SAPTARSHI ERA 31 In the almanacs in vogus in Kashmir of the successive years, it is the "&rafynta" Saptarshi- mana that is used for all determinations of time. Fron {he above stalements of Dr:. Buhler himgelf it is clear he has admitted Kali 1 B. 0. 3101, Saptarshi Kali 26 B. 0. 3076. His admissions that the Great Bear, the Saptarshi Mandala which enterd Magha in 3177 5 76 B. 0, and that the Era established after their entry into the next star 6 Aslesha' begins in B.C. 3076, reveal clearly that he was aware of the stay of the sapta- Ighi in Magha for the hundred years from B: @. 3177 - 76 to B. @. 3077 ~ 76, the statements in the Puranas which describe tke of Yudhishlira as exlending over the cenlury, and the verses 13-3, of the 'Brihatsamhita' and 1-56in Kalhana's Rajatarangini: So he knew that the time of the Mahabharata War is 3138 B. C. But knowingly the Western Orient lisis kept back the truth: reign AGE OF THE MAHABHARATa WAR TOPIC VI. ASTRONOMICAL EVIDENCE Brihatsamhita of Varahanihira The Astronomer Varahamihiracharya refcrs in verge 3 of chapter XIII of his Brihatsamhita' to the reign of Yudhishtira, his ascent to the heavene, and tk:e Saka Era in vogue in ] is time. The So 10 verse ws reproduced by Kalhana a8 the 56th verse in the lst chapter' of his RRaje = tarangini' and used him to bring into mutual relation the time of the ascent to heaven of Emperor Yudhishtira, which was tke kasis of tho chronological reckonings in his history, tke Saka Era in vogue in the time of Varahamihir? , thc period of Yudhishtira' s and the movoment of the constellation of the Great Bear: The same Era based on the ascent to heaven of Emperor Yudhishtira is other wise variously referred to a8 Laukikabda, Yudhistirakala, Sapta rshimana &nd Kashmirabda: Brihadgamhita XIII-3 01 Rajatarangini I-56 reads {31 I) M1TtT 7qig 37q; STafa gfafez? #vat 1 Tefatqvfaga SttaTr: 7F4rTaRT II Which ncan8 8 The Saptarshis wore in Magha during the reign of Yudhishtira. The (Swargarohana's) time of by reign, getf ASTRONOMICAL EVIDENCE 33 Yudhishtira coupled with 2526 (years) becomes Saka- Kala. In the above verse the first line is plain_ The ellipsis in tho second line h1as to bo filled vp thus : M1 "At7 (gfafuattyv) Ta: (#Ta.=tatftlav #T&:) Wfav tafagt (Tat) , Tttiv: (Tafa)" sThe Sw-rgarohana tino of Yudhishtira 99 coupled with 2526 bacomes Sakakalzh:' The Saptarshi Mandal? , or the cong'ellation of tk e Great Bear passed over from the region of tk0 sba1 Magha into {kat of the nexl, in Kali 26. That wcs tiie beginning of the Era variously knowr 88 Saplarshimana, O1 Yudhishtira Kala, O1 Laukikabde , or Kc shmirabda: The Era known a8 Saka Ert , in vognze in Varaha- mihira's time began in Kali 26 plus 2526 o1 Kali 2552 01' B. C. (3102-2552) 550. Varaha, in lis endeaVour to fix una mbiguously the starting point of the Saka Era in vogue in his time, first laid down the contemporaneiby of the Saptarshimandala in Magha (an astronomical event) and the period of Yudhisk: - tira 8 reign on the earth: Then he slated that the Saka Era began 2526 years after the commencement of the 'Yudhightirakala' i. e., the years of Yudhishtir's ascent {0 heaven (Kcli 26). Bul 'there is no reforence whalever in his verge to ihe Salivallana Saka ond no evidence Of any kind Lo indicate, 28 the modern Orientalisls of the European Sckool choose to take for granled, that by Sakakala" he meant the Salivahana Saka. 9 &8T 34 THE AGe OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR If WO suy)pose that Varaha referred to the Salivahana Saka: in his verse; since the Salivahana Saka is agreed on all hands {o hegin in Kali 3179, he would have given 3153 yeers from the Swarga- rohana Kala of Yudhishiira (i. 0.y Kaii 26). Bul he gave only 2526 years 28 the dis lance from Yudhishtira Kala (Kali 26) to his Sakakaala, i. Kali 26 252,6 2552 of Kalis:kn. Thereforc, lhere nust; be anotller Saka Kala whieh w?s in existencc in his {ime. So, we have to i ke into consideration only that particular 'Saka Kala of 2552 Kali but rot the Salivahana Saka of 3179 Kali. Varaha has fixed the time of Yudhistira' & reign in the first line of the vorse a8 the dime when the Saptars] is were in Magha As regards the time when the Saptarshi Mandala wc 8 in Magkc, Bhaltotpala, in his commentary on Varahamil;ira'$ Brihalsamnhita XIII-3, quoted th1e stalement of Vriddhagarga "af&att frgatea fqzraat" s8Kali Dwapara Samdhautu Sthitasthe Pitrudaivalam" as the aubhority. #Kalidwap 1o sandhi" 108116 tho turning poin & w-hen the Dwapara-Yugal (m)8 t0 2 close and the Kali-Yuga began. It happened 36 ycara after the Mahalarata Wa: an(7 a4 hrs 2-27'_30" 01 the 20th1 of February, in 1he rear B. @. 3102, according 10 8he unanimous opinion of Wostern 88 wo]l 8 Eastern Scholarg: This has never boen disputed by any. That tle Great Beatr was thon in Magh" has been unaninously declared #he Aslronomers and the auth018 of the Puranas of aleienl Bharat. 0., Tadg hy ASTRONOMICAL EVIDENCE 35 The opinion of Dr. Buhler has been quoted. General Alexander Ounningham has, in his note under the caplion 6Saptershi Saka" on page 17 in his publication 6Indian Eras" given a table showing the star-region in which the Saptarshi Mandala i8 found in each century from B. C. 5877 to 4. D. 2125, according to which it was in Magha from B. C. 3177 to B. C. 3077. The table is repro- duced at the end of the discussion in this Topic VI-for reference. It should clcar a17 tho dovbls and misconceptions of the modern hiskoriens: Dr. Cunningham's table agrees with the slatements of Vriddha Garga, Varahamilire, Bhattobpala and other ancient Indian Schol: rs. It is thus proved 75 years previous lo the cdvent of Kali in B. @. 3102 i. in B; C. 3177 the Saptarshi Mandali entered the region of Magha. The same Yudhishtir was crowned King of the Pandava' g share of the Kaurava Dominions, with his capital at Indraprastha, according io the Puranas the relevant statements from which have been reproduced in chapter V. It is established indisputably that the Saptarshi Mardala wes in Magha from B. C.3177-76 t0 B. C. 3077-76. Yudhishtira also was crowned 2t Indraprastha jn B. @. 3177, gradually exlended his Empire and performed the Rajasuya established hingelf a8 the Emperor of Bharat and in B. 0. 3151 he lost his Empire in the game of Dico with his cousin and remained in exilc for 13 years thcreafter; {haul ig Lill B. C. 3138, and in B.C. 3138 waged the Grcal War known a8 the Mahabharata Wa1, in whicll he emerged viclorious andl orCC again esiablished hinself 38 tho e., vcar king and 36 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR Emperor of Bharat; and in B. @. 3102 Mahabharsta Wai i.e. 3102, having learnt of thc Nirvana of Sri Krishna and the advenl of Kali, renounced his Fmpire a1d Alarted 011 a L0u1' Lo all tlte holy placcs of pilgrimage and finally i1) B.O. 3077 , asccnded to haven. From the first; ine in tke verso of Varaliamihira (XIII-3 of his Brihat Samhita), it ig stated that Lhe period of Yudhishtira' s rule extended from B. @. 3177-76 L0 B: @. 3077-76 andl the Saptarshi's were then in Magha. In the accord line of the 8318 verse it is statedl that; th1e addition of 2526 to the Swargarohana Kala i. 0. B. 0. 3076 of Yudhishtira we the Saka-Kala in vogue in his tine. That is Kali 26 2526 Ksli 2552 01' B. C. 3076-2526 B. @. 550 is the beginning f the Saka Era in vogue in Varcha's time. There is no conjecture 01 interpretation of ou1 own in this calculalion. It is based on the stolements of Varahamihira himgelf. We llave thvs beon ablo to establish the Magha century of tke Saplarshi's from B. @. 3177-76 to 3077-76 R. C. the slartirg point of Llle Yudhishtira Kala B. @. 3076 &8 well &8 the Saka Era of Varaha is B.C.550. To conjccture that the Saka Era mentioned by Var:ha is the Salivahana Saka and to twist the meaning of the verse Lo swit; the conjecturo is absolutely 1222 - warranted . Varahamihira indicates his ow1] Limo in his Pancha Siddlhantika in the lino "arafa aavw reaisrtFQ ( Saptasvi Veda Samkhym Saka Kala mapa:: s,yn" which means that he W3s wriiing in the year 427 of the Saka Era i. e in Kali 2552 plus 427 2979 Kali. So Varaha belongs io 2979 Kali or B. @. 3102-2979 B. @. 123. To fix his hy get ard ASTRONOMICAL EVIDENCE 37 dime 28 427 on the Salivahana Saka Or (78-+427) A. D: 505 is obviously wrong: The year R. C. 123 35 Varahes' s time agrees with the tradition that he adorned the corert of Vikramaditya who ruled { S the Emperor of Bharat from Kali 3020 o B. C. 82 10 Kali 3120 01 A. D. 19 and established 2 new Era of his OWns the Vikrama Era, in Kali 3044 Or B. C. 57. Rao Bal advr P. V. Kane, High Court Vakil Bon) and Presidenl of the Indian History congress in 1953 interprot8 ihe verse in yet another original nlannor. He holdg that tho two lines of the verse XIII-3of the Brihaisamhita give us iwo independent aentences; thab in the first Varahamihira reproduces in his own words tlie satoment of Vriddhagarga that while Yudhishtira was reigning (from B. C. 3177 to 3077) the Saptarshi Mandala was in the star Magha; and in the second line Varaha gives u8 Lis own r7le (principle) that by the addition of 2526 to the year on the Salivahena Era (which hegan in 78 A. D.) WO the YeaI (time of Yudhishtira). We reprodvce his interpretation in his own words below: sThe vorse (Br.S. 13.3) conlairg two inde_ pendent clauges in the two halves of it, viz namely 1. The congtellation of the seven sages was in the Maghas when Yrdhisktira ruled over the earth 38 and secondly the Saka Kala increased by 2526 10 years represents tha time of that king: In the first half of XIII-3 and in geveral other verses of the same chapter (viz. verses 7 to 11) Varaha 10) bay get king 38 THE AGE OF THE MAHAZHARATA WAR states in Ara Ferses Vriddh::gargw' s views (which were in 12.0 Anstuph metre, 88 tk-e qota_ lions given Utpala from Vriddhagarga will show) in his 0TH words and in the second half hle states his OWl view whnt th? Yulhishtirj Era. The parwicle 'ca' is adcledl hecauge ihe two halves are two independent sentences and {h1e second half comes to this 'Shad dwika panc: dwi yutah sak kalah thasya r:jnah (kalah, under- sbood fron he prece-ling word Saka-Kaleh). (vide journal of the Andhra Historical Reasearch Society, Rajahmundry, Vol: XX Narayanarao Mcmorial Volume 1954' and p 75 of Ancient Hindu History II by this outhor:) Let 18 ag1e0 for 2 momeni to this Curio:s interpretation of the learned Sri Kane. Then it; means Varaha quoted Vriddagarga's opinion only L0 reject it 10 offer his own- There is 1o walrant for such an a8su mpiion anywhere in the verse or in the whole treatise, or anywhere else in the tradition of Indian Scholarship. 1t is entirely due Lo the distorted vision of Ihe loarned Sri Kane himself due to his anxioty to juslify {he statement that the Kaurava 8 and Pandava s were alive in Kali 653 or B. 0. 2448 in the I-51 vorse of Kalhana' s Rajalarangini: (which was itsolf an interpolation Dr: Buhler:) But there is 10 roason arose of any kind Lo take the two lines of the verse of Varaha #8 independent statements, or that the Saka-Kala referrjdl Lo by him is the Salivahana Saka-Kala. On the other hand "awrirrv" tThasya Rajnascha" in the bv pt and by ASTRONOMMICAL EVIDENCE 39 gecond clause is manifestly based on the first. Varaha starls with fixing the time of Yudhishtira's reign in the century from B. @. 3177 to B. @. 3077, and proceeds to fix the bazinning of the Saka Era in vozue in his tine 21 2526 yea1S after the year of the ascent of Yulhishtir? to heaven towards the end of the centry of his reign (in B. C 3077-76 or Kali 36) i. B. C. 3076-2526 B. C. 550. This delermination is accepted a8 such by Kalhana in I-55 of his Rajatarangini &8 the determination of the Samhitakaras hased on the movement of the consteila lion of the sevem sage8 (aw71? #faa" #tt: ra &aalst fauit:" ) and 2s the authoritative basis for the chronology of his history and thon in his I-56 reproduces verbatim XIII-3 of the Brihatsamhita of Varaha-mihira: There is no indi- cation in Kalhana'8 writings that there was any differonce of opinion among the ancient samhita- kara8 'Vriddha-garga' and Varahamihira' . In the comment"ry on Varahcmihira' s Rrilia &- s)mhitn writtan by B'al'otp 1l `, he did not give any indication {hat there w ` $ difference of opinion between ' Varaha' and 'Vriddha-Garga' . In addition, he qnoted the vicw-point of Vriddha-Garga to strengthen the opinion of Varaha. Therefore tke imaginary vicws of the learned S1i Kano a10 contrary to the view-points of Kalhana, Vriddha_ Garga, Varaha and Bhatlotpala- They are #lso contrary to the views expressed by Alexander cunninghan and Dr. Bvhler and what has been stated iz Puranas Mahabharata: 0., and 40 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR Let 17S follow Bhatiotlpaia's commentary on XIII-3 of Brihct salmnhita :~ "gtui #zitoutaq: aradui, gfafez? qiga7+, Tvat rrarfa , #al, TTfa 4ryroafa, #ATI #aiaa-g &ITT :e4Fryot" sMunayo Marichyaadayah Saptcrshayo; Yudh- igtire PandutanaYe, Nrupathan Raajani, Pridhviim Mahiim, Snasati paripalayati; Maglaasu Magha - Nakshathreshu, Aasan adhyathishtan' s When Yudhishtira was the ruling monarch on the carth the sages were in Magha: ~awife Tavr:" m cThadhahi Vriddha Gargah' -neans 'Vruddha Gtrrga also 8aYS in the s3nle way and &nd he quotes the same WOrds of .Vrnddha Garga' "#fsatrr #elg feuatia fqgeaat" 6Kali Dwaapara sandhautu sthitaasko pithru daivatam means stat the ransition age of Dwapara into Kali, the geven sagea were in the Magha star:" Then Bhattotpala proceeds with hie conimenlary thus :~ "a4v gffezttqt TtST: tafes RTaaraT-T: (Tasyacha Yudhishtirasva Raaj- nah shadwika , pancha dviyutah (2526) sakakaalo (427) gatah" which means in the (Swargarohana) kala of Ydhislira elapsed 2526 coupled with Saka- nrupakaala (4271,'7arua4zafa aTaaq aatTTo1& WTTT TTTt "Evam Krute Yadbhavati taavadvarsha brun- dam varthamaana kaalan yaavat gatha nleans :- when calculated in this manner tho total amount of ye?rs (i; 0., Kali 26 plus 2526 plug 427 2979 (years) will be the period that elapsed from the ge7: faf3y7: Z7 m" ASTRONOMICAL EVIDENCE 41 commencement of Kali 1 to the time of the writirg of Brihalsamhita Varahamihira. (i.e., 3102 B. C. minus 2979 Kali =) 123 B. 0. Therefore, according to Bhattotpala, the Sakakela of Varaka in XIII-3, of his Briliatsamhi la is 427 of Sskanrupakaala but not; A. D. 78 plvs 427 505 A. D. of Salivahana. According do the interpretation of the learned Kane: algo #Gakaka 1,, increased by 2526 represents Yudhi- 9$ shtira Kalah meang Sakanrvpakaalch 427 plus 2526 2953 of Yidhishtira Kaala_ (Yudhishtira Kala's beginning B. @. 3076_ 2953 B.0. 123 the time of Varahia' N. B. Begiur ing ( f S.skanrupakaala is C. 36+2526 ) 2552 Kali and tke beginning of Salivahan : Saka-Kaala ig 3179 Kali. On tLe oi'er hand he adopts tlloir agreed opinion a8 his own. Thus it is clear fron) Kalhana' g I-56 which i8 bnt & quotalion of the game a8 well a8 XIII-3, of the Brihatsaihita of Vzrahamihira that the {ime of asrent of Yudhishtira to heaven or the beginning of the Laukikabda is in B. @. 3076, the beginning of the Saka Era in vogue in Varaha' s time is in 2552 Kali, or B. C. 550 and that the period of Yudhishtira's reign lasted from B. @. 3177 to B: C. 3077 and in that Oentury the time of ilie Mahabharata War is 36 years befora Kali O1 R.@. 3138. 11) by (B. 40 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR Let 11S follow Bhatiolpaia's conmentary on XIII-3 of Brihct salnhita : "ga} #7eurau: #crdwl, 9ig774, Ttat 7ToTrfa , Tem; 7a, TTTfa qfrqtoafa , #ATI #ATT87T 31aT 3eTFygt" #Munayo Marichyaadayah Saptcrshayo; Yudh- istire Pandutanaye, Nrupathan Ranjani, Pridhviim Mahiim, Saasati paripalayati, Maghaasu Magha - Nakshathreshu, Aasan adhyathishtan" sc When Yudhishtira wag the ruling monarch on the carth the sages were in Magha ~agrfe Tavr:" 1 cThadhahi Vriddha Gargah' -neans (Vruddha GtcIga also saYS in the s3n0 way and &nd he quotes the same Words of <Vrddha Garga' "#fatrr #eig fewataat fagaaat" 6Kali Dwaapara sandhautu sthitaasto pithru daivatam" means sat the transition &ge of Dwapara into Kali, the geven sagc8 were in the Magha star:' Then Bhattotpala proceeds with hie conimenlary thus : "TTT gfefezrtyv TtIT: tafs RTTatrTTa: {Tasyacha Yudhishtirasva Raaj- nah shadwika , pancha dviyutah (2526) sakakaalo (427) gatah"_ which meang in the (Swargarohana) kala of Ydhislira elapsed 2526 coupled with Saka - nrupakaala (427,,"[aqeauzafa aTad 3+ adt#[v 4TaT TTT #Evam Krute Yadbhavali taavadvarsha brun- dam varthamaana kaalan yaavat gatha neans : when calculated in this manner tho total amount of ye:rs (i. 0+ Kali 26 plus 2526 plus 427 2979 (years) will be the period that elapsed from the gfafcz? fafzya: m" 644 26228~~8448& 1 {dbwhi #abk 282222232222283 888888888 88888 EEEeeseeeeseees Hate 288982282338838 EEEEEEEEEEeeee 0t 232323832328322 ] 04 1 2 Jimdadilum 04406228488$# # & L 8 1 AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR TOPIC VIT WRONG CONJECTURES At the time of the Mahabharata War, correctly determined, the Pard-v:8, Draupadi, Sri Krishna, the Keuravas, Bhis ' n)f , Drona and other Bharata Warriors musl be in existence. It should be the transition time from Dwapara to Kali. The Constellation of the seven gages be in the star region of Magha. It has heen admittcd 01 all hands by tke Astronomical Scholars of ancient Bharat, the Europoan Orientalists like Dr. Buhler and General Alexander Ounning- ham {hat the Constellation of ike seven sages W: S in the Magha resion fron B 0. 3177 to B. C. 3077. The Astronomers the authors of the Puranag of ancient Bkarat, all unanimously declare that; Yudhishtira wa8 reigning d"ring that century. That the asc0nt of Yudhishtira to heaven occrred in B. @. 3076 or Kali 26 when the Con- stellation passed over from Magha L0 the nexl stars is conceded Dr. Bublcr, Dr. Wilson and Goneral Alexander Ounningham: How could Sri Krishna who pagsed aWay in B. @. 3102 and the Pandavas who passed aWi}y in B. @. 3077.76 he alive in B: C. 2448 or 1931, 1886, 1500, 1400, 1100, Or 900 if any of the conjectvres be correct, of the nodern historians of Ancient Bharat, the Enope_n Orionlalists 01 their Indian disciples? How could the Congtellalion of the sevon sag08 wicl Wa:8 in Magha in B. C. 3177 lo B. @. 3077-76, be in any of tlle years noted above? Is thero any and and By WRONG CONJECTURES 45 ingcriptional or historical authority for their deter- mination? Such determinations and arguments deserve only the contempt of genuine historians and competent scholars: The final result of all the above discusgion is the time of the Mahabharata War i8 indisputably B. @. 3138, when the Saptarshimandala was in Magha century: 12) AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR TOPIC VIII. INSCRIPTIONAL EVIDENCE There are four inscriptiong, extant and available to uS (apart from several others that might have been lost 01 destroyed), which prove conclusivelv that the Mahabharata Wa1 occurred in B. @. 3138 or 36 years before Kali. Of these four, two have been published in the Indian Antiquary. Tho third does not seem to have attracted the alten- tion of the Government Archaeological Depart- ment. It has been copied from the person in possession of it and published recently &t Masuli- patam in the Krishna District. The fourth is tho copper plate inscription of Emporor Sudldlhanvah The contents of these four inscriptions bear out; the deterimination, without scope for any doubt, that the Mahabharata War occurred in B C. 3138. It is hoped that this evidence at east will be respected the Modern Indian historiang and they will be able t0 reconstruct tho correct history of ancient Bharat on the basig of it Sri Krishna passed away in B. @. 3102 tho Kali Yuga commenced simultaneously. In Kali 1 01 B. C. 3101 Yudhightira renounced hig Empiro, ingtalled Parikshit 01 the imperial throne started with his brothers on the Mahaprasthana or the Great Jonrney. Parikshit reigned for by and 60 INSCRIPTIONAL EVIDENCE 47 years and died due to snake-bite in B. G. 3041. His son Janamejaya wag crowned in B. C. 3041. In the 29th year of his reign i. izi B.C. 3C13- 3012 O1 Kali 89, in the year Plavanga on Monday the new 4 moonday at the of Chaitra, he dona- ted two villages to two religious institutions and the two gift-deeds were inscribed: One of #hese is found published in the pages 333, 334 of the Indian Antiquary. It reads as follows : The First Insoription JANAMEJAYA'8 GIFT DEED "rigraataat #oatjytttoaf TTaRTTTAT &t II qig # ToatyTAT: RTS JATATT**<t: TolvHazTaTHTPIzaTrT €fraiea: II "rafFaet 54} <&& CoatTeY (( 04) [raaaa (s&)acv? vaewnrfa anrarryrgi #raTr? errnetrTatfarrot- 9rhia7} aqwm} #4TA (? ) FTa M7o: #amtovyt: fesfset- 7v4f FvaTHTF4: {trauf-tre#gfagroa: 4fvwaveqdtarg _ {rlare7a TTY Tagia #3t% Traaranatefettafoo6zeevre _ rrfuartatrTFrT gaHaTT RTIaT #rrrqfqar-agfafizrt- falaagfagrevrw #g*utafrfhfazT: "qaftrt straferutrgthE4T: tfeat afaoartt #trrytettttTISO ? 1 tfivt GIYTOTTT: $7" 1 EtrIT fvort _ 7ar #fau 4 (r) Tsvfeqagfag-a&-i vafezcawrrtrt _ Tztaf 9za fffa&tav" qrrrorfuuwr ( ? ) Tifufirzvreqag: Fatttfaa FageuTST o ATSFHaT fq7If faggoTeTIovy sfrat_ afawigtrivaw4 afa7u47 J7 iTootatrrgav # qiazea 77 (TaTt, 3) (? ) FFqa ( gaztaretrv #tfeo: Il 3., end 7a4 gfafos Tsre 48 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR % II 3tfecyvztafaoT57ov #ijfhrtyheey 7trv 7 3r7 rtf7v7 3tvds4 &fzv MTIa Tr74 3r II (R) J} ata9ros7ytfed E17Tt? #SZTr<5 aaTfataaimifa TTGaTacyt4 q4' Il 1 ) taattialagv qranizqT&A 1 Tratnqa?W <azd fgt&; II HuT gfatt #u1 fqgart &rlat ( aruatTT J Gaft <tyfh 4frryaa II (x) arirg bfea 53 vafizv Dfad 7 $ ! Ta: #6z7 TTa #v: Faq <ttqatra: II (#) raeut qrattt Tt aataft &*av: [ gfoaarva=rfur fasztat Tiwa sfv: II (() It is clearly stated in this ingcription that the of land for the worship of Sitarama mentioned there in was made by Emperor Janamc- jaya in the Yea1' 89 of {he Jayabhyudaya Yudhi- ghtira Era. Jayabhyudaya Yudhishitira Saka is named after 'Jaya' "aq7 04 garaa" statho JJaya' mudeerayet" The nane by which Bhagavan Vyasa called his great 38 tSJaya" now known a8 sMahabharata" which he began to conpose in Kali 1, and compleled in 3 yoarg. Jayabhyudaya Yudhishtira Era 1 means therefore only Kali 1. Jayabhyudaya Yudhightira Saka 89 means Kali 89 or B. .C (3101-89) 3012. It was the 29th goq #aq gift epic INSCRIPTIONAL EVIDENCE 49 year of the reign of Emperor Janamejaya; He Cwne to the throne on the death of his fether Emperor Parikshit in Kali 60. The Second Irscription A sinilal of land was made on the 83m18 by the s3m0 Emperor Janamejaya for the worship of Kedaranathaswamy at the Kedara Kshetra, in the Himalayas to the head of the (Usha-Matt Sri Goswamy Ananda Linga Jangama Swamy through Jis disciple Sri Jnana Linga Jangama. The copper-Plate on which the deed is ingcribed is preserved to this in the sanle Matu: It does not seem to have reached the 1otice of the Government Archaeological Depart: nent. So it i8 not reported in the Indian Anti- quari: A copy of it hag been taken by some Andhra Pilgrims of the Saiva religious sect to the Saiva Shrine, it has been published 012 their retuin home, 2t Masulipatam: The text of the inscription 88 published them is given in his Ancient Hindu History Part-I, this Author. The same text is also given below :_ (rafta? jarryaqyfafe37q+ coa11e4 [olanafaat (58) Taa? &afanrfa aaTaTFTTIt #tata ? etrnetrratrfertetrr _ zat #gTAqamto sToaTthh 5ryt4at hfaetart: &4&" awfewetgatiaat &urfawro4 eaatrea 4774J74: G9TtSFT AeafhataafavoiTTFTY #tfizowatafvsTSHETTrTfua- 'TaaTraTTFT vnta: #gttnt qfrfafazt: Il Tana 3 fevwarfamT} Harfeti} 1 gftnafezvart #rnr Jtrfvt 13) gift d:y gift day and by by qere 50 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR #gvuT, 5ait<Hri zavztrret , &fatuj drraat , #atfe;ut: dv:, gateq satza7m wafaocttrtrut #aTiqia ffafaaq &&- tiqTuITTfA faavrezavstatzafaa #zrag Fag6413r34 TTFT- suTgfqawt fxavht9trzyq sital?arwfve J9r17TAA &farug- #aifezit joarrryat #7fia atataftt 0 QaztaietT aifezo: 37 II 3tfautrrafaetstvrv 1 atffnrrgt 4arr 7 M337 Ttfhvd 8h & &64 &hrv JTaIfa Trq $d II(?) at9TGagTtey #TAT7D #s3TTSA} 1 araltaiaaiafa qroaiafagw %& I1 (3) J} Faattt &ut fujatt 8w ar 7 aruatig Gam #7tft qfravaa (l Faatt qrarriat aaaftt 8*74: qfozarveerrfur fatatyi mT4a sfw: II (u) The above two inscriptiong rocord two gifis of land by the Emperor Janamejaya at thc timo of the Solar eclipse on the samo In thc first the Donar i8 described 28 seated on tho imperial throne at the city of Kishkindha and in the second a8 seated on the imperial throno at the of Indra-prastha. The discrepancy may give rige t0 some doubts: Janamojaya Wils crowned Emperor of Bharat at Indra-prastha, tho imperial capital. But it was the cuslom in anciont; 28 in modern times, to celebrate the coronation of the Emperor simultaneously in all the chief cities; of the Empire. So it wag the tradition to 877 2a4 gfatT doy. city INSCRIPTIONAL EVIDENCE 51 degcribe him in & gift-deed a8 the Emperor seated on the throne at the chief of that pro- vince in which the land gifted away was situa- ted: Kishkindha was the capital of the South Western province of the Enpire. So he was des - cribed as "fafona TTiTI fuTaTazte:" sKishkindha Nagryam simhasanasthah" in the gift-deed relat_ to the land in that province and a8 06 saytg 0 TT? fatavtfy'- 6Indraprastha Nagare simhasana- s Ghah" in the gift-deed relating to the land in the Himalayan region. Janamejaya was crowned at Indraprastha The two gifts wore made at Indraprastha only. But the narration in the gift-deed wa8 appropriately worded in view of the location of the land gifted. The apparant discrepancy need not give rise to any doubts of the authenticity of the gifts 01 the deeds 0r the inscriptions: The Third Inscription THE AIHOLE INSCRIPTION There i8 an ingcription on the walls of a temple of Siva in the village 'Iballi' in the Dharwar district: The date of the ingcription is stated in the sam0. It states further that by the year 556 on the Saka Era, (or 634 of the Christian Era) the time that elapsed in Kali, after the Mahabharata War is 37 3735. The inscription was carved the direction of king city ing only. by 52 TXIE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR Pulakesin II in A.D 634. It was this Pnlakesin who defeated and checked the Southward progress of the conquering armies of Sri Harsha Siladi- tya 01 the banks of the Krishna. His heroic, exploits, his victory in the ba tlle with Sri Harsha, the other princes defeated by 1i1n are al1 des- cribed in the ingcription: The inscription in its entirety hag been published on pages 67-71 of the volume V of the Indian Antiqary. Modern historiang have been attaching very great impor- tance te this inscriplion 38 it gives 2 delailed account of Pulakesin II 10 whom tkere is ro reference at ail in the Puranas. The same inscription has been also pubJi- shed a8 the 16th document in Vol. No. 34 of the Keavya-mala 'eries, under the caption 'Silalekha' or 'Stone ingcription' of Pulakesin II of Ghe Ohalukya dynasty: (Vide pagcs 68-72 of I4.1 of Prachina Lekha Mala). This inscription is all in Sanskril. rLhie author of this volume: who hag already pvhlished another volume entitled 66 Ancient Hindu Hislory part II; (Archaeological evidence misusedl"), wko was known, hcfore he Look Holy orders, {he name of Sri Kota Venkatachclan, Gardhinagcram, Vijayawada and is known now, after assuming the ochre vobes a8 6 ( Advayanamda Sankara Bharati Jagadguru Swani, (Srimadabhina va Vir_ paksha Peetadhipati)" had occssion to study the facsimi]e text of the inscription published in {ho Indian Antiquary and also learnt the Drocess of deciphering the letlors of the ingcription, with hy INSCRIPTIONAL EVIDENCE 53 the help of Sxi Rallabhandi Subbarao Pantulu, M. A., B. Ed. relired Professor of History in thle Government Ails College at Rajahmundry Honourary Secretary of the Andhra Higtorical Reseaarch Society, Rajahmundry. Thus he ccnld acquire first hand-knowledge of tle text of tke inscripbion: Here is the portion of the text giving the duie of the ingcription: Mh !1 faty faw35 g #TraTetaTatfaa: 1 #ca1azaay+ 9 (T) <acaaag 1 Tataat Tmnat?; VEt tvrTt7 1 #aTy &aaaTg TR'Tttfy 4ys# 11 which mneans: Fron tke Mahabharata War, and Nfter 30 + 3000 + 700 +-500 years passed in Kali and 50 + 6 + 500 y0ars after the destruc- {ion of the Sak? kings, 012 the advise of the scholar Ravikirthi, this temple of Jinendra has been consiructed (hy Pulakesin II) Dr. Fleets conceding that three Eras a10 referred 10 in the ingcription, interprets it thus: _ Firgt he trans- lates the text; of the inscription a8 follows : Vide P 73, of Vol of the Indian Antiquary, #Three thousand seven hundred and thirty years having elapsed since the War of the Bharatas and (three thousand) five hundred and fifty years having elapsed in the Kcli and five hundred {'7d six yearg 0f the Saka kings having elspsed, #kis stone temple of Jinendra the abode of glory, wag construcled the order of the learned Ravikirthi etc , elc-, 14) ard 4ag by, Age, by 64 THE AGE OF THE MAKABHARATA WAR According do his inlerpretaiion (1) The Lime of the Mahabharata War works out to 3730 (506 on the Saka Era or) 584 of the Christian era 3146 B.O. only approximatoly to the correct figure 3138 B. @. (3) The time of the beginning of Kali works out to 3550 (506 on the Saka Era or) 584 of the Christian e1x B.0.2966. This is in utter contradic_ tion to the determination of B.C. 3102 unanimously accepled the Artsonomere and Historical Scholars of the Easl 28 well 28 Uhlo West. (3) Dr. Fleet eqnates tho Saka year 506 with 584 A. D 28 the timo of the inscription- But Pulakesin II belongs to Saka 556 or A, D. 634 and not A. D. 584. So his interpretation cannol hve accepted as it leads to wrong resulls to zho three Eras. The interpretation attemptod in theKavya- mala series i8 even more outrageous: There it is conjectured that there ar0 mnistakcs in the ingcription and two correctiong a10 guggested in line 2 of {11e portion of the inscription given above. Thev suggest tho corroction of (1 ) " xeaTae labda Sata into 3 'a3Taarta" sSahabdagata" and (2) "aaegaag" sSateshwahdeslu" into "TAotoag" sGateshwabdeghu" . According to these corrections the interpretationg baged on them : _ by #Sap RTTt" and INSCRIPTIONAL EVIDENCE 55 Salivahana 556 or A. D. 634, 30 + 3000 100 + 5 3135 years have passed since the Maha- bharata War and the advent of Kali. The Maha- bharata War and the advent of Kali are dated B: C. 2501. This is not acceptable a8 the date of the Mahabharata War or of the advent of Kali to any school of Historians or Astronomers: So it is clear the correction does not mend wrong: The author' s interprelation is a8 follows : 'I-0 laxt reads tFrom the Mahabharata War (37 years the advent of Kali, and the period 30 3000 + 700 + 500 4230 years af'er the advent of Kali and 50 + 6 + 500 or 556 years of the Saka Era. (or Salivahana Saka Era ) . Salivahana Era 556 A. D. 634 time of Mahabharata War works out to 4230 634 B. C. 3596, which is unacceplable. So there must ho some miatake somewhere. But the two correc- ions suggested by the Kaavya Maala Publisheres ar0 nol necossaIV. (ne slight correclion will do to yield a plausible interpretation for the whole ingcrip- tion: That ig to correct "araaaeg 4vg" Sateshwadeshu Panchasu" into "qaoaoag Gateshwabdeshu Panchagu" (In the script of the ingcription the letter "t" 6Ga" is similar to the letter *&" #Sa" ) Then tlle ingcription reads 8 sFrom the Maha- bhrata War t0 the advent of Kali elapsed 37 years (30 + 3000 + 700 + 5) or 3735 hsve pagsed by 556 of the Saka Era or 634 of the Christian Era: (1) So the time of the Mahabharata Wal then works out to 37 + 3735 3772 before Saka 556 or A. D. 634 B. C. 3138. By upto qay' 56 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR (2) Time of adveni of Keli = 3735 years before 634 A. D: 3101 B. C (3) Saka 556 A. D 634 the Gime of Pulakesin II, It is possible the "" "Gla was correctcd into Ss1 " 6Sa" somo inlerested party at tho time of the discovery of the ingcription before its publication. This has Lo be carefully invstig led, for the rest the inscription is clear: The Fourth Inscriplion THE COPPER PLATE INSCHJPTION OF FMPEF OR "SUDHANVA:" This inscriprion wa 8 inscribcd Sv dllanya, who ruled over (uzara1. He WtS {n FnpcrT 1 with some tributary rulers onder him: He reigncd in the Sth Century before Christ. While Sri Adj Sankar: Wzls touring ir the Western rogions of Bharat, carrving on his glorious campign #gainsd the heterodox religious school of thought like the Buddha, the Jaina and the Kapalika, higloric assembly ef religious leaders all denominati on8 of religion) Wals held under the auspicos of this Emperor Sudhanva: A4 the religioug Jeaderx uanimously elected the Emperor to preside ovor the discussions 10 decide the victor in tho controversies: Thoro Sri Sankai Was able to refute thle arguments and defeat the exponents of all the heterodlox religions one after another. Thus more then 3 thousand religions including hy by (of and INSCRIPTIONAL EVIDENCE 57 Bauddha Ja,jn? were disproved and condemned Sri Adi Sankara with irrefutable argumenis: The Sanatana dherma, based on the authority of the Vedas was declared the victor and the only true religion by the president Sudhanva who was also the Judge. He kcd been an adherent; of the Jaina religion: But now, tha+ 2l1 his doubts had been cleared, he renounced his adherence t0 the Jaina religion; and overwhelmed with wonder at tbe vast erudection and profound philosophical wisdom of Sri Sonkare , he sought refuge with &le great religious truth from hin A memoran- dom presented by that Enperor Sndlanva to Sri Sankara was ingcribed on copper-plale and this inscription was first prblished by 8ri Kanwperli Malkandeya Sarma in his Biography (published in 1928). It has copied from {hat publication Sri Mudigonda Vonkat: Ram: Sastry and ob- tained the author from the latter and now repuhlished below. It is not known whether it has found place in the pages of the Indian Anti- quary. Text of Inscription : Seft Hrtateatyit TA: L sTT teteTGy "shcvatfaatrrraaTrTfa - rgotfozav favTa faarryfa _ aatfadraarfa aTazfaatfa - aofenafat faaiaatratfa _ MTHAAUTATO4 s4ar4iratfa _ fatazar fazajv Ja Tvoamttaia fafeavtfawafa- 15) and by by by Tt:" Tfa _ 58 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR 9wajat #TaqqTa QTtaat: MYITTATAFT Ttraat T7 Arat Tethfo yfafozr 5TT - Tigfryne #raadziafoa-gfatv rTiiuty fasfea: #tafzfafiaatTSttf? 1 aaatfez: qrtfatat: 1 aaagf 3TrHTrt MagariyafrtTsafa 1 famfarateat TMTRTTT #T-rfafz #4 4 aa Aarar Hara -tutatry_ jyavarf-g-arfa 1 aaaagvtzna 7 fafacTitaTG;4g& #rafetaqta?Ty <Tarat vfrinaaweia vafa 1 Maty7tata_ aTgr fafav faa4&ts 791y74t vaaerf<rawrah, Gtat? , Ttt, ET<TT, xnftaeg Mnaedoulfa SaTra1j - HaTF? #fstat: #rerfvar: 7 TT}Trfevt #fioTaYTTTFIa &1 Tafatretu Ttraafa vufata % azetrratta Tar nviaf 1 74 7T_ 4fxA zfvrfq TaFaTatt Teaterrfie4 Ftatt&sivI4fa #uaeA raatatfuTaaaa TTam Fawiatafy aavavt qe9Ta[- TraTT #rztrarwf | 7& #3 #TyTTaTfe tnaarf? qfn_ rrifafararfavauigr: gawfnafafa {TTratdiafcv Ttratut #= vrad Tiaryfafta #rariautfe 37574 , #Tafz: faoe farATIAT J7IfaTZ @Taat&t Algourfa &i& Tafzt gutgaryinfuTatay &lfe# #few7t fava fav4tat)fa watia TTTT fararettram yrzarrrrufavtFH ~tavitT #faraawfifq sya Tgty #1rt4 rvamfavatrfegT #rraartt | ara TT- aiaruratrfavi fajaaizv ietqa) #fe& TT 3eT*g vaay 7urhavFrT TAT&TTETTatT@-aryataitttifatrrifugat afasatar = | #afawv Tvartrqf raiad Sama: ataa a7atytyat HTTMTT 93rT77T*M 7 1/" farg Tfyoz 3ati qwaag #a INSCRIPTIONAL EVIDENCE 59 3FaETS ata Fatar JrtttSTTA #yizqrotveufavv; favvg 1 qftatoatfe Ta1goara #geunfa fafaoztvraj #wd _ rfaaoa ( AT sTarqTa dataThfast? Tafa 93 fafahaar4a #iffaynaai #Taatzt {hagarTFa rettyetfe aa 87fa #&sa: qrnTttttmT T1feqa ( 5ruaifazfea #mgag Tvaa fat 1 FatoytI ~etg: M" gfafczran#; 3283 jurat araata: arfzajt JG o* This inscription is dated the year 2663 on the Yudhishtira Saka: The same yeai the Journey on the earth of Sir Sankara came to a cloge. The Great Acharya lived only for 32 yerrs- The years of his birth and demise therefore work out to 2631 and 2663 of the Yudhishtira Era 01 B. C. 509 and B. C. 477. The four great religious institutiong known a8 the grent Sankara Peethas wero established by him as follows in the years noted ageinst each:- At Dwaraka (Saradamulla) in B @. 491. At Badari (Jyolirmathe) in B. C. 486. At Jagannadh1a or Puri in B. @. 485. At Sringeri in B: @. 484. These groat religious ingtitutiong developed lheir own branches in turns and they have heen in existence, under an unbroken of administrators. Of the subordinale branches of the Sringeri Peetha tWo have attained congiderable vogue in Dart Andhra ) of the country. Pushpagiri and Adhinava Virupaksha: which Ihe author is the present incumbent): The lists of successive heads of thege Poothas ar0 all preserved in the respe- this (of 60 TFIE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR ctive Peethas and reckoning back with the help of these lisls we C212 a1rive at the time of the foundalion of the Peethas: Tho copperplale inscri- plion of Emperor Sudhenva proves that t1.0 year of the deniso of Sri Sankara is .2663 {of tho Yudhishtira ICra 01 B C. 477-76. The heginning of the Yudhishtire Era i8 the tino of the Malia _ bharata Wa1. It had alroady heon provedl 1t0 ho B. C. 3138. So Sri Sankara' s life works out to B. 0. 509 to B. C. 477-476,. Yudhishtira Era 2662 + 476 3138 B. C. Fifth: Other inscriplions : 1. In deeds doled 011 the Gupta Era Mahaabharata War ig referred to ( Vide Flcol 0 II, 120, 124, 129, 134, 139.) 2 An inscriplion founcl in the Icmple of Madhukeswara in tho villego Ban:' vasi in Uho North Canara district; is dated 168 of tho Yulii- shtira Era. It mtst; have been ingcriled in T. C. 3138 168 B.O. 2970. 3. The inscriptions in the Belgaum District of the Mysore State are daled on the Yudhishtira Era. (Vide Journey of Dc; Fleet, through Myeore' Canara, Malabar ~-III 122) 231, 411.) gift and AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR TOPIC IX: OPINIONS OF HISTORICAL SCHOLARS 1. Dr. Wilgon writes 8 The general fact {is) that the dynasties prior to Krishna precede the time of the Great War and the beginning of the Kali 2g0, both which events are placed five thousand years ago, ( Vide Wilson & Vishnupurana, London Edition P. P. LXIV and LXV) 2. The Kurupandava War was fought 37 years before Kali, that is 3139 B. C. (Vide History of Clagsical Sanskrit Literature by M: Krishna- machariar, Intro ~ XLIII): 3. Encyclopaedia Brittanica l4th edition 5th volume p. 658; 66 The Kaliyuga Era is the principal Astronomical Reckoning of the Hindus. It is frequently, if not generally, shown in the Alma- nace: Its initial point in 3102 B. C,, and the year 5002 of Kali began in A. D. 1900" 4. The famoug Mahammadan Astronomer Mr: Alberuni mentioned in his Indian History that 1031 A.D i8 equavalent to 4132 of Kali Era i. 0. 3101 B. 0., (Vide Alberuni' 8 Indias tranglated Dr. E. 0. Sachaun, IInd vol, 49th chapter 5-7 pages.) 5. Mr. Lionel, D: Barnett in hig book 'Antiquities of India' Ed: 1913 published Warner writes thus: 16) lay by by 62 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR 6The Kali Era is suppoged to begin from 3102 B. 0: (1. 94) 66 The present Age, which is the Kaliyuga is reckonod 2s having hegun in tho year 3102 B. C. (page 193). 6. Yrof : Buclhanan mentiong 311 ingcription in the temple of Madhukeswara at, Banvagi in North Oanar } dated in the 168th YAr nf Yudhi- ghtira Era. (i . 0., Yudlhishtira Era hegins With tho year of the Mahabharata War 3138 B. 0. 168 2970 B. Q.) 7 . Prof . M. A. Trajer in his commenary 0n 'Rajatarangini' al80 admitled and acloptcd this Kali Era which started in B.C.3102. Mr. C. V. Vaidya in his Epic History admitted {hat Kaliynga 1 is equivaleni 10 3101. B. C. The Nepala Rajavamsavali O1" tho his'ory of Nepal followed the 8?me Kali Saka that star- ted in 3102 B. 0. (Vide Ind. Ant, Vol. XIII: P. 411 ff) 9_ Dr: Buhler also admittedl and alopted B. @. 3102 a8 the 8tarting point of Kali and Kali 26 or 3076 B. 0. aS the slarting Point of Loukika Era 01 the Saptarshi Era in his com- mentary on Nepal history 01 the manuacript of Ka shmir history Rajatrangini )- Vide Indian Aniiquary Vol V, 27th page ff. Ed: 1876 ) Era and AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR TOPIC X No INSCRIPTIONAL EVIDENCE To THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF BHARAT BY THE MODERN HISTORIANS It is wrong, to claim that the history of ancient Bharat, of the Eupopean Orientalists and their disciples; is based on the evidence of inscriplions: The Weslern Hisiorians have claiming that they have based their hislories of ancient Bharat on the evidence of available ingcriptions: But it cannot be substantiated: The corner stone of the history of ancient Bhcrat, even for {hese European historians, is the date of the Mahabharata War. But; have not arrived at any clear determira- tion of it even up to now. They have been in- dulging in mere varied conjectures that it might have occurred in the 24th, 19th, l5th, 14th, o1 9th century before Christ: For the rest, they have no other reliable sourco for their histories of ancient Bharat except the 'Mahabharata' the Puranas: Their only contribution to the his_ tory of ancient Bharat is the theory of the con- temporaneity of Alexander, the Greek conqueror and Maurya Chandraguptas which is 2 baselegs and wrong theory. They have no ingcriptional or historical evidence to produce in favour of this theory . Indigenous historical literature, our purnas, indlicate tlat Alexander's contemporary in they 1lth, and 64 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR India was Chandra Gupta of the Gupta dynasty who w?s reigning in B. @. 327 and could not be Ohandragupta of the Maurya dynasty of Magadha who belongs t0 B. C. 1534. No evidence of any inscriplion has adduced for their delerminalions of the dates of the birth and demise of the Buddha. They have made false propaganda that there is mention of the year 164 in the Kharavela ingcription bnt there i8 no mention of the year 164 or any oihcr year in that inscription. There is no inscriptional or historical evidence to assign the inscripiions of Asoka to B: @. 272-36; no date is any where mentioned or referred to in any of the inscrip- tion. There in no evidence or authority for the assumptions of these European Oriontalisls tkat the Yona Kings mentioned in the inscriptions are Greek princes or that Yona neans Grcek: There i8 no menton of the word 'Greek' in any of the ingcriptions. There is no inscriptional evi- donce for the dates of the reigns of the liffer- ent Kings of the various dynaslies of 'Kings that ruled over the different parts of Bharat from the time of the Mahabharata War: The only authority for their accounts of a1] these reigng i8 our Puranas themgelves: They 2IA not; awaro of the Saka Era of B. @. 550 mentionedl by Varahamihira, or the Sri Harsha Saka of B. @. 457 or the Malava Gana Saka of B. @. 725. are not aware that the Gupta Era of B. @. 327 started with tho reign of Ohandragupta of the Gupta dynasty: They date it in A. D 320 wrongly_ Ingpite of the vivid accounts of the higtorical Iyccn They NO INSCRIPTIONAL EVIDENCE 65 personages of Vikramarka and Salivahana in ovr Puranas and in tke indigenous histories of Kaghmir, Nepal, and Magadha, they deny their historicity_ There is no higtorical or ingcriptional evider ce jr support of their theories or to confirm the wrilings of Ptolemy, Megasthenese and Heuntsang: which they get 80 much stare. They have no ancient inscription to show of any century prior to the Christian Era. So itis preposterous to propagate a8 {hey have been doing; that their histories of ancient Bharat have heen based on the evidence of inscriptions. There i8 @ strong belief among the scholars of the traditional type, in our country that such ancient inscriptions, were destroyed deliberalely, 28 soon as they were discovered; because they disproved their theories and falge histories: There is no limit to the outrages perpetrated by them to reduce the antiquity of the history of ancient Bharat: If no inscription of any of the centuries before Christ wa8 dig: covered, how could their histories of ancient Bharat of the Centuries before Christ be besed on the evidence of ingcriptions? To know either the Bharata Yuddhakala Or the Hindu dynasties and the periodg for which ruled, there i8 no other source than the Mahabharata, the Puranas and the Inscriptions shown in this book: They proved that Bharata Yuddhakala was 36 years before Kali Or 3138 B: @ and listed out the varioug Hindu Dynastios thet ruled continuously from the Mahabharata War 3138 B.C. to the twelth century after Ohriet: 17) pet by they AGE OF THE MARABHARATa WAR TOPIC XI MOVEMENT OF THE SAPTARSHI MANDALA AND CONTEMPORARY OF ALEXANDER EXPLAINED The Kali a20 heran in B. @. 3102. The Mahabharata War occurred in B. @. 313&. TThe same year Parikshit was horn; and th1e Yulhisk- tira Era was foundled, 75 years hefor Kaii Lh0 Constellation of the Seven Sagcs cnlcred Ulac region of thie star Magha. The Constcllalion remaing in oach star region for 3 handrec yorS before passing over into tho next swnr region: The &nthors of Our Puranas, and our Astronomors by their referonces to tho positisn of the Constellation of the Seven Snges in relation Lo the of the kings that ruled Ow('r #lu ((11U - managed to preventive a8 well 36 : corre iro to any digcrepancv that maV otherwise crccp into thoir accounts of the reigns af Iho kinga; The European Oreintalists wore in {ho heginning unaware of the significanco of this fcaturo of the chronological references in O11]' Puranas consequenlly neglected and ignored it But latcron discovered that this Was an unerring and indisputable authoritative instrument for detecting the erroneous chronological detormina- tions propagated by them in their arbitrary his- torica] writinge with a view t0 deliberately reduce the antiquily of the hislory of #Ilciont Bharat: They could not pooh it. It i8 1 natural measur0 and neang of reckoning lize. haves reigns try an they pooh MOVEMENT OF THE SAPTARSHI MANDALA 67 It is based on science and car be verified by precise calculations. Mr: Pargiter was the first of the Modern Oreintalists of the Western schoal who attempted to find fault with it &nd justify their erroneous chronologicel determinations. But he has only exposed himself to ridicule by his outrageous attempt. Still his false theories and erroneous conclusions are deemed authorita- tive by our modern historians: They have not been able to detect the mischief of which he w2s guilty. It is shown below. The conneclion be l ween tho hasic facts of the hisiory of ancient Bhcrat and t1.e moveinent of the Congtellation of the Seven sag0s is establi- shed in the verses given below 38, 39, 40, 41, 47 of chapter 271 of the Matsya Purana. &t |1 HaiqarfiqaTt Tiavoin 9wfata: [#aa &ra g #y 4vrahnt II #aq-271,38) tloTHTEg 7vfAnI Tat qeia? g7: 1 a7a< <atyozt wef-d #HTFTTT II - araatTaiat #ray #ieiaTat 97faa: #fawa Yrw4Tat: grroai: xTafvfit: II 7 Tradutaattia: 9aq #tfiaat TTT: &cafatfa #Ta4ta #ieraig 4t1g7: Il 271,41) aTautrg #fatfa rTatat: TT: aa& atattear4a %ri II 271.47) and 271-39) 271.40) agfaitt 9aryy 68 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR They mea1 8 From the time of birth of Parikshit i. e the time of the Mahabharata Wai to the time of the coronation of Mahapadma nanda, of Magadka, it ghould be known thal 1500 years passed. (38) In the Salme manner from the lime of Mahapadmanand: to Uh1e time of the Andhras who were Poulomas, in addition to the 1500, another 836 years passed. (39) From the time of Parikshit t0 the time with the Anlhras at the end, the inlerval is lo be reckoned 1500-836 or 2336 years, according to the Sages well versed in Puranag. (40) (The expression 'Andhrantaat' in the above verse-40 is gramatically capable of two interpre- tations- one taking it a8 a Bahuvrihi sanaga- 'j8 the time with the Andhras at thc ond or tho time up to tle advent of the Andhras' or taking it 28 Shasti Tabpurusha - '8 the tine of th1e fall of the distruction of the Andhras 01 t0 the of the reigns of the Andhr? But obviously the verse proposes to fix the times of the kings and not to foretell the destruclion of any aty. It is clear the next verse 41). the iime of the birth of Parikshit, Gh:o Seven Sages were in Ghe gtar Krittika as8ociated with the fire Godl Agni: In the time of {he same Andhrag, after conpleling 2 cycle of 27 stars in 2700 years, they will ho once again in in the same star Krittika and the repeatg itself: (271 7 41). king erd 8.' dyn: by By cycle MO EMENT OF THE SAPTARSHI MANDALA 69 the time of the 24th king of the Andhra dynasty Siva Satakarni, in Yudhishtira Saka 2705, were in Krittika again, the cycle repeats itself. The other Andhra kinge (from #lie 25th tO the 32nd) ruled for 106 years: So by the end of the Andhra dynagty from the time of the Mahabharnta War or the birth of Parikshit in B. @. 3138, (2705 106) or 2811 years passed. That is, the Andhra dynasty came t0 a close in B. C. (3138 3 2811) 327 B. @. That was the beginn- ing of the Gupta dynasby of Magadha. Alexander' & invagion of India is dated 326 B. 0. So his contemporary in India could only be Chandra gupta of the Gupta dynasty and not Ohandragupta of the_Maurya dynasbv. A careful sludy of the movement of the Contellation of the Seven Sages also proves the truth of the fact When the Seven Sages are in the 24th star century the land will be subject to many evilg. (Matsys 271 47). Verge 423 of chapter 99 of the Vayupurana states it more clearly thug : xi II gcafyqtrarytat; #reanfrfaa sa 1 aigia #agfaat #fagufa #aty II (ag &&-*28) 18) By they and 70 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR which means : At the time of tho birth of Parikshit (ie. the time of the Mahabharata War the Seven Sages were in Magha: the time of the Andhras (the beginning of the rule of the Andhra dynasty) they reach the 24th star century. From the birth of Parikshit to the coronation of Mahapadma nanda 1500 years; but we add up the figures given for the reigns of the individual kings in the ligt in the Puranas it works out to). 7"' 1504 From Mahapadma nanda to the begi_ nn of the Andhra dynasty. 801 2305 That 8, after the hirth of Parikshit, in tho 24th cetury the rule of the Andhra dynasty commences. the time of 35th yoar of thc Andhra rule, 2340 years pass since the Mahabharata War: Thereafter the length of the reigns of the Andhra Princes 460 years (2340 460 =) 2800 years on the whole. The difference of eleven yeaIA is dlue A.0 slight discrepancies in reckoning the roigns of tho individual kings: If we add 11, WQ 2811 yars from the ime of #he Mahabharatm War L0 tho of tho Andhra dynastv. According L0 the Vayupurana also it is 2811 years: The movement f the Constellation of the Seven Sages thorefore provided the autlors of our Puranas with a valuable devise 10 correct slight discrepancies and inlicatos the broad intervals of time correctly. By (if ing By get end MBVEMENT OF THE SAPTARSHI MANDALA 71 The European historians of ancient Bharat identifying the Chandragupta known to have been the contemporary of Alexander in India in B. C. 326 a8 Maurya Chandra-gupta, deliberately ignoring even the obvious possibility of his being the Gurtc- Ohandragupta, managed to reduce the antiquity of the history of ancient Bharat by 12 cenluries at one stroke. Similarly and in pursuance there ofs Mr. Pargiter has tried to discover some discrepancies in the references in our' Puranag to the movement of the Constellation of the Seven Sages and to pnsh forward the date of the Mahabharata War from B. 0. 3138., several centuries: The mischief perpetraled by Mr: Pargiter is exposed here below : Mr. Pargiter' s 6Dynasties of the Kali Age' According to the historical accounts in the Puranas and the references to the movement of the Congtellation of tle Seven Sages the time of Mahabharata War is fixed at 36 years before Kali or 3138 B. 0, Mr. Pargiter alleges that the verse in the Purana is incorrect, and amends it deliberately to suit his own preconceived notions and calcultions. But his emendation does not carry conviction; on the other hand it proves rediculoug. In his dynasties of the Kali Age, he quotes on page 59, the verse 271-41 of the Matsya Purana which gives the movement Qf the Seven after compleling the cycle of 27 stars in 2700 years in the time of the same Andhra Kings. It means from the time of the Mahabharata War in B. C. 3138, up to the tine of the 24th prince by the Sages; 72 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR of the Andhra roval dynasty the Seven Sages will niove round the 27 stars in 27 centuries and come back to the game position- According to the Purana8 by the end of the reign of the 24th king of the Andhra dynasty 2705 elapged gince the Mahabharata War. The reigng of the remaining eight kings of the Andhra dynasby from the 25th to the 32nd together make up 106 years. So by the end of the Andhra dynasty, the time that elapsed aince the Mahabharata War worke out to 2811 Y0ars: Mr: Pargiter alleges that the verae 271 4 41 of Matgya Purana is incorrect and emonds it 10 suit his convenience. The first line of Mataya 271-41 rcads : 1> 66 araqftraaTTa: gaqarfiaat #RT: | The samle sentence i8 foumc i1 the Vaju7 and Brahmanda Puranas with a slight varialion 2 ( aradtraraiz: qarrrfi & &a 1" which neans : At that tine Lhe hirth of Parikshit in 3138 B. @. the Seven Sages wore in the star century of Krittika (associated with the God Agni) Then the second line reads the game without any varialion, in all the Purana8. acafarfa "Tagratie1ig 44197: I1 66 After 2700 years, they will be again in the same star in the same Andhra period" . (The Reader may be puzzled to find it stated that the Seven Sages were in Magha in Vayu 99-423 and in (of MOVEMENT OF THE SAPTARSHI MANDALA 73 Krittika in Matsya 271-41) at some other places in the Puranas at the same time. But the seeming inconsistency can be easily explained Tke Constolk&- tion of Seven Sages is a long Constellation of Seven stars in & zigzag' line. It is possible that in the course of its movement at any one time, if the star of the Constellation at one end is in one star, the star a} the other end may be i1 another star and thege who observe the position of the Constellation may note it with reference to the stal 2t the one end or the star a+ the other end throughout consisbently. Then there will be no difference in the intervals of time measured by the movement of the Constellation' A detailed account regarding the movement of this Conslellation is given by Alexander Cunning- ham under the caption SSaptarshi Era' on page 17 of his Indian Eras, with the help of a table which is reproduced at the end of Ohapter VI of this volume. The above verse 271-41 of the Mastya Purana has been emended by Mr: Pargiter to suit his inlention to reduce the time of the antiquity of the Mahabharata War thus. His emended version reads : "grawgraatgd xattrrfa &r 1'* (Vide page 75 and foot-note 4 on page 59 of his Kali Age): Which means : 6Then; while Pratipa was reigning, the Seven were in the star Pushyami" The reason he alleges for emending the text of the Puranas is simply that 19) Sages 74 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR the text of the Purana seemed to him to be wrong: But really there is nothing wrong with the text in the purana. He then explains the meaning of thc verge 38 emended him sThe Great Bear W3s situated equally with regard to the lvnar Constellaiion Pushyami while Pratipa was At the end of the Andhras wh1o will be in the 27th century afterwards, the cyclo repeats itself: sThe Great Bear was conjoined with Magha in Parikshit's time for 100 years: It will be in (ie. Conjoined with) the 24th Constellation for 100 years at the termination of the Andhras' (Dynasties of the Kali page 75). Foot ~ Nole 4 : aThis statement road with the preceding statements would imply that sonle 814 years are allowed for the interval betwoon Pratipa and Parikshit: Thus Pratipa to Parikshit 814 years: Parikshit to Mahapadma Nanda 1050 years; Mahapadmananada to the last Andhra 836 years, total 2700 years"' _ The Great Bear being in Pushyami, Pratipa reigning at that time, the interval from Pratipa to Parikshit being 814 years all theso statemente 10 entirely the concoction, inconsi8- tent and obsurd of Mr. Pargiter do not find 3 place anywhere in any Purana. Thus, with the help of hig own un warrented emondation of the Ver8B in the Puranas Mr: Pargiler arrivos at (2700 814) 1886 years for the interval fron the Mahabharata War to the end of the Andhral dynasty. The expression, in the Purana meang by king: Age king and MQVEMENT OF THE SAPTARSHI MANDALA 75 at the time of the Andhras and not at al 'at the termination of the Andhras' . Mr: Pargitel is obviously wrong in stating that the Great Bear took 814 years to move from Pushyami to Magha, a distance of only two stars in two hundred years. The Modern history of ancient Bharat by European Orienlalists and their Indian disciples ig full of such atrocities deliberately perpetrated io mislead the people of Bharat and prevent them from ever knowing their real history: Countless such adrocities can be proved against Dr. Buhler in the histories of Kashmir and Nepal. The sentences in the footnote 4 bv Mr. Pargiter can mnislead only such students of Bharat as are not acquainted with Sanskrit. He says 66 This statement read with the preceding gtatenents would imply that some 814 years are allowed for the interval between Pratipa and 9 > Parikshit: But in the preceding verses referred to there is no expression which could mean 814 years, no montion of any Pratipa, or of the star Pushyami: It i8 all the concoction of his brain. Let u8 concede, a8 Mr. Pargiter alleges that 10 reigned from Pratipa to Parikshit at the time of the Mahabharata War. The total period covered by their 10 reigng is according to him 814 years: In hig criticigm of the Ohronological detailg in the Puranas, earlier in his volume 'Kali Age' he opines that 2 period of 1000 years assigned for the reigng of 32 kings only Kings 76 THE AGe OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR is excessive, and 2, period of 723 years for 16 kings i8 absurdl and therefore the statements in the Puranas with regard to time are unreliable. (Vide page 13 of his Kali Age.) How Czl1) he himself now suggest for the reigns of ten kings 814 yezrs which works out at 814 years per reign ? He has not hesitated furthcr to allot 814 years for the movenlent of the (treat Boar from Pushyami to Magha 2 distance of two atars in the face of the recognised astronomical fact that the Great Bear takes one hundred years to move from one star to the noxt and two hundred years to InlovO from Pushyami to Aslogha and thon to Magha. AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR TOPIC XII FALSE PROPAGANDA OF TH EUROPEAN ORIENTALISTS That the Kali Yuga began in B.C. 3102 O1} the 20th of February at 2-27' ~30* hours W28 known to 31] the European Orientalists from Sir William Jones who laid the foundationg for the history of ancient Bharat in 1774 to Vincent A: Smith of 1915. They knew algo the Mahe- bharata War took place 36 years before Kali or in 3138 B. @. But they do not admit it openly. Still it i8 undeniable that it was known to them Dr. Wilgon digclosged to his European friends in 1825 that the Saptarshi Era began in Kali 26. So ell the three Eras dating fron] the Mahabha- rata War and the victory of Yudhishtira the Niryana of Sri Krishna and the advent of Kali and the Swargarohana of Yudhishtira and the passing of the Seven Sage8 from Magha into the next star were all well-known to the Euro- pean Orientalists, but, with the deliberate and intenlion of bringing forward the date of the Mahabharata War for reducing the antiquity of the- history of ancient Bharat and to digcredit the historical value of our Puranas, they do not profess the knowledge but appear to be ignorant of them. (Vide Vol. IV of Jone' 8 Works 20) p.52 78 THE AGE OF THIE MAHABHARATA WAR of 4e 1778 Edn-, fle Clercrology of the Hindus' "The yeai' 4891 Kali corresponds i0 1790 of the Christian Era. The later Crientalists were also i Wa1'0 of the commencenent of the Kali Era in 3102 B. C. But they have been consistently declaring all through that for {he reconslruction of thc chro- nology of the history of ancient Bharat tioro was no welknown event of definilo dlalc previons to the inva sjon of Alexander anl ihereforo they were obliged to start with #h10 idlenlificn- tion of the contemporary of Aloxanler in Tuia at the time of his invasion in B. C. 326-324 a114] managed to identify Ohandragupia of Iho M:'"ryn Dynasty whio really belongs t0 K. C. 1534 {18 the contemporary of Alexandcr in B. C., 324. Really the contomporarv of Alexanlcr was Chandragupta of the Gupla sty. So theiv false propaganda began with tho sintement of sNo date O1 public ovent can ho fixedl hcforo the invasion of Alexander"' of Elphinsione (Vidlo his History of India p 11 in fifth Elition). Next Max-Mullor als0 dcclared similarly: (Vidlo pp. 3-8 of the 1859 edition of Ixis TTistory Cf Ancient Sanskril Iilerature an( {hc 8a1n0 Slatc- nent is repoaled in Dr: Floet $ #Giclo 0n ATpi- graphy in the Indian Empire Imperial (Fazelccr of India, Vol. II. 2)[) . 3-6). By such repeated false prop:gnnd: Ahicy have been able to miglead all studets of #Iicnt Indian history and by dating Chandragupla Maurya 6,711 dyna FALSE PROPAGANDA OF THE EUROPEAN ORIENTALISTS 79 of 1534 B: C. in B. @. 324, to reduce the antiquity of Ancient Indian History at the very beginning 1534 324 1210 years. Sir William Jones himgelf has recorded that he knew that according to the Puranas the invasion of Alexander occurred aftor the reigns of the Satavahana kings of the Andkra dynasty. He has also stated his opinion that the end of the reign of the Andhra dynasty was in 452 B.C, obviously he was aware that Alexander invaded India in B. C,, 326. In these circumstances to bage the chronology of the history of anCient Bharat 01 the invasion of India of Alexander which does not find any place in any of our Puranas could only be the result of 2 deliberate intention to reduce the antiquity of our history and culture. (Vide Jone s works Vol: IV - on the Chronology of the Hindus:) by AGEOFTHE MAHABHARATA WAR TOPIC XIII: HISTORY OF MAGADHA OR history OF MODERN ANCIENT INDIA Of alL the couniries in L1c worl: Bharat has the most ancient history and cullure. To reduce the anticuity of its history clinre first the Chrislian Missionaries and then tho 8( called Orientalists, deliberately conspired plotted. The Frenc 1 savant Louige Jaccoliol writes in his 'Bible-le-Indi' sTlla Roverend Fathers, Jesuits, Fransicians; Srnnger Missions and other corporations unile with touching har- mony in India to accomplish 3 work of Vendla- lism, which it ia right to denounce 3,8 wcll 10 the learned worlal a8 to Oriont lists. Everv nanuecript, evory Sanskrit work th": ! falls into thoir hands is imncdiately condemned congigned to {h1o flamcs. Needlless L0 say that the choice of thcso {entlemon always falls fron preference upon thoso of the hxigshos / #nlicnity, and whoge autheuticity mey app631 incontosta- ble" _ #Evory new arriv;] reecives & fo1mnal Grtler SO t0 dlispose of #11 that may fall indo Hie Jaenidlg. Happily, happily, the Br: hmins do not opon io them tho socrot; s'orcs of thcir literary woalthl, Philosophic and religicus." ( Vido Louiso Jaceoliot'& Biblo-le-Irdi aT" (l Mr: N. Chidlamkar:} lyyer'9 Varahan ihira's Rrihat Samhi l:e Ze English Trans- lation, Introduction foot noto) and a1( [ and p.2 HISTORY OF MAGADHA 81 Sumitra, king of Ayodhya, of thle Ikshvaku dynasty and Kshemak?, king of Hastinapura both pagsed away childless in Kali 1504 01 B. C., 1634. So the Kingdom of Magadha gained agcendancy and the kings of Magadha became the Emperors of Bharat: The history of Msgadha is thus narrated in the Puranas : 3f II "&M1A MTRa aeaa faqifaa alarfa Far4 <turt ratirafifra* I" "tunra daiztt TTT TTo4 #atrua il YGeatrvgrf6z #ATaF4Ta4waq II When Sahadeva (son of Jarasandha and king of Magadha) w2g killed in the Mahabharata War his cousin Somadhi (alias Somapi) wag crowned at Girivraja, capital of Magadha. He ruled over Magadha for 58 years: His son Sruta- sr va rulel for 6 14 YoJ18 afser hin: Thus they (the Puranas) proceed to mention 22 kings . and the periods of their reigns and then it is stated that thege 22 kings of the dynagty ruled in all for 1000 years on the whole: But when WB total up the figures for the individual reigns of the 22 after collating the accountg in the varioug Puranas, and add them up, the total works out to 1006 years. The difference of 6 years is comparatively ingignificant: Thug aCCOr- to similar carefully worded and consietent accounts in the Puranag: 21) 37 kings; ding 82 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR 22 kings of the Barhadradha drnasly ruled for 1006 years after that 5 kings of Pradyota dynasty ruled for 138 years after thal 10 kings of the Sisunaga dynasty ruled for 360 years after that 2 kings of the Nanda dynasty ruled for 100 years 1604 yeare It wag then, after the Nandas, that Chandragupta V Maurya became the king of Magadha: His time thercfore works out to the time of the Mahabharata War B. @. 3138 1604 1534 B. C. But the European Orientaliete pretend ignorance of the Kali Era or the time of the Mahabharata War; introduce the date 324 B: C, of Alexander & invasion of India, and pretending to identify Chandragupta founder of the Maurya dynasty a8 the contemporary of Alexander in India, fix the date of Chandragupta Maurya at B. C. 324. Thus they have managed to reduce the anliquity of the oncient history of Bharat and push forward its enlire chronology 1534-324 1210 years. In consequence of thig initial migchief the date of every well 7 known evant in the hislory of Bharat is rendered doubtful and & subject of controversy. The turth i8 the contem- by HISTORY OF MAGADHA 83 porary of Alexander was not Ohandragupta of the Maurya dynasty but Chandragupta of the Gupta Dynasty. If WB correctly identify the contemporary of Alexander a8 Chandragupta of the Gupta dynasty and reckoning the periods of reigns of the kings of the 8everal royal dynasties of Magadha a8 given in Purana8, proceed backwards, the time of the Mahabharata War works out correctly to B. @. 3138. So if this fundamental error in the identification of the contemporary in India of Alexander the Great, be rectified we can arrive at 2 correct chronology for the entire history of ancient Bharat: Such 2 chronology is available in the previous publications of this author 'Ancient Hindu History Parls I and II" There i8 no evidence of inscriptions or coins or reliable hislory for this theory of the contemporaneily of Alexander the Great and Ohandragupta of the Maurya dynasty of Magadha advanced a8 proved fact by these European Orientalists and their disciples: The independent evidence they are able to cite in support of their theory, is the reference in the writings of 2 Chinege pilgrim who visited India thousands of years after Maurya Chandragupta, evidently based on the information he WzS able to gather from his chance companions on the way with hia cursory acquaintance with their language: These references of a foreign trveller based on hearsay ar0 held a8 authoritative evidence for the history of ancient Bharat: But the writings of Sri Veda 84 THE AGE OF THE MAHA?HARATA WAR regardel #X0 people of Bharat &8 & very incarnalion of God, who Wcs an oyo witress to the Mahabharata War and reduced what he actually saW to writing in the great Nationa] Epic of India, the Mahabharata and the other Puranas, revered a8 sacred religious treatises throughout the country all thege centuries down to the present time, ar0 rejected by thege European Orient:lists as unreliable and invalid a8 evidence for hislory. In the law of no country do we find any the best importance attached to hearsay evidence. But it is guch hearsay evidence that i8 held a8 the supreme authority for the ancient history of Bharat. The European Orientalistg and their supergtitious followers among Indian historians and sludents and profe- ssor8 of history ar0 now filled with such reve- rence for the modern false history af ancient Bharat whose foundation are based on such flimsy evidence, that they are not prepared to Con" sider the evidence of ingcriptions, if it go0s against the falge and erroneoug determinationg of their history, Vyas?, Iv AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR TOPIC 5 XIV. HISTORY OF KASHMiR Kalhana, a schola and son of 2 Chief Minigler of the State of Kashmir; wrote a history of Kashmir in the Sanskrit Janguege. In the introductory verges he describes the procedure and principles followed by him in writing his history. St Il Tada #urarg Afv {yfaaefa { Tilo7taraud #grv #fadvaf II (<ra 7tfifv 1.8 ) 3tz Ttad ceayuamgttT arafanT&' #dafaftriaeg %ya II '} 1.9 ) ale4fnqfac dFHIaffTaryjaua | 1' aainetrrfzat #foat4 #yat: II ( 1.10) Which meang : SI am rewriting the history previously written by the ancients (ecrier writers); but (on that account) it should not be ignored or neglected without noting the purpoge (it is inten- ded to serve). The histories of the ancient kings were recorded each by gcholars contemporery {o the king; and eye-witnegses with first hand know- ledge of the eventg of the kings reign: They wrote them in seperate volumes and made their exit from this world. But the historians of recent; 22) Tct 86 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR times comnpiled thoxc records of eyewitnesses inlo conlinuous Ireatises, but included in them rmours and beliefs curent in their times and ane- cdotes gathered thom from hearsay. the incorporation of such hearsay matler; severa] inconsisiencies and mutual con{radiclions arose in their historieg: In doing 8o thore is neither dexterity nor intellect. Thorefore, in writing this ancient; history, ny main purpose is t0 remedy such errorg ard correcl t} cse conlradiclions, with the help of old records, deeds, inscrip- tiong etc that are at my dlisposal . Sever:l scholars such 38 Suvrata, Olavillak: ra, #nd ollcrs had attempted byfore mne. Therc ar0 elevon guch his_ tories previous scholars. I havo studied Gare- fully theso eleven histories, and in addi ion tho Neela Purana by Neela Muni, the ingcriplions of the ancient kings, the learned (scientific) Arcaliscs produced in their times, tho songs of thc court poels in which the qualities and achiovomonts of the kings were celebrated, end I anl, with this eqipment, endeavonring in this volumc, X0 produco a true correct history of Kashmir:" Thus Kalhana prcfaces his history in th1o 8th, 91h and 10th verses of tho lst chapter of his Rajatarangini. He never moddled with tho lists of the kings of tke periods of their reigns He has simply eechewcd the hcarsay matter incorporated by later writers with the authentic records of the original writers who were oyewitncsseg with first hand knowledge of wlat they w1Oie ahout Evidently ho hold {hat hearsay informadion cannot he valid mnatler for history. by By gift by HISTORY OF KASHMIR 87 The histories of India prepared by the European Orientalists are al1 mainly based on such hearsay evidence held to be the most valid authority for historical purposes. These European Orientalists have further rejected a8 invalid and nnauthorative the indigenous historical writings in ovr 'The Mahabharata' and the Puranas etc , written by eye witnesses like Veda Vyasa. On the same principle they have rejected the Rajatarangini of Kalhana #8 & historical document of q"estionable validity. Alleging that he deviated in places from the earlier historieg on which he bssed his history, they have altogether rejected, th1e first three Tarangas or chapters of his Rajatarangini, and interpolating and emending his text in geveral places in the subsequent Tarangas, to suit the determinations of their own hislories based on fantastic theories and heargay evidence, managed to reduce the antiquity of the hislory of Kc shmir, 38 they did similarly, with regard to the history of Magadha, by 1200 years. The process which they manoeuvred this nefa- rious achievement is given below. According to the history of Kashmir; tho king who was on the throne about the time of the Mahabharata War, Gonanda I, wag related t0 Jarasandha king of Magadha: He hsd joined his relation Jaragandha in the latter attack on Sri Krishna and seize of Madhura, and taking part in the battle with his armies, died on the batlle field there, at the hands of Balarama. His son Damodara I who succeeded him to the throne of Kaislimir a lended the Swayamavara or function arranged for the choice of husband the daughter epic by by 88 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR of the king of Gandhara, attempted to interfere with the progranme wnd was lherefore killed there by Sri Krishna himgclf. Then Lord Sri Krishna proceeded to Kashmir and clearing th0 doubts of the ministers of the state who were hesitating {0 place a wonan on 1ho throne, arran- for thc crowning of Danodara' 8 wife who was then carrying: In a faw months the queon gave birth i0 3 mole child who w28 named a8 Gonanda II, and the ministers placed Ahe child on the throne and crowned him (Gonanda II) It wa8 only a short time thereafter #l1t th0 Mahabharata War occurred: But 88 the king of Kashmir wag a minor, neither of the contesting parties, the Kauravas and the Pandavas, sought his help according to ou1 history. He was then only 2 child of iwo in B. C, 3138. So he nust have been born in B: @. 3140. According t0 Kal- hana, the coronation of Gonanda III, 2 later of the game dynastys wilg celebraled 2330 years before thie time of Kalhana himself, who wag writing in 1148 A. D,, ie, in (2330 5 1148) 1182 B. @. The 12th king afler him (Gonanda III of the sanle dynasty wag Mihira Kul&. He wZg a true Kshatriya. He belonged to B. @. 704 t0 B. 0. 634. The European Orientalisls hold that Toramane , a, prince of tlie eighteenth generation among his (Mihirakula's) descendente who really belonged to B. C. 16, was the father of Mihira - kula and #hat this Toramana wa8 2 Huna (a foreigner 4e non Indian) and profess that they a10 unaware of the region fron which these Hunss cane over to India, O1 thoir previous higtory Or dynaaty: Those are obviously fantastic fictions and abaolntely false storieg: Their attemnpt is to ged king HISTorY OF KASHMIR 89 push forward this (alleged) foreign king af Kashmir Mihirakula' from B. C. 704 - 634 to A. D. 632 13 centuries and taking this date of Mihira- kv]e 38 the corner stone for the chronology of the history of Kashmir, {8 their date 324 B. @. for Chandragupta Maprya for the chronology of the hisLory of Magadha, and thus reduce the antiquity of ihe entire history of Kashmir and ancieri Bharat by 12 or 13 centuries, on the whole. ln supporu of tl:is theory of theirs they refer to the inscriptions nos, 164, 165 of Mandasar: But there i8 no date in either of tbem. And they are spurious, manoeuvred them to justify their fantastic agsumptions (Vide His'ory of Kashmir by this Author) Here is the Irue story o Toramana. The of Kashmir; of the 17th generation among his degcendents, of Mihirakula who was & genuine Bharatiya and Kshatriya Wag Pravara - Sena. He had two sons by name Hiranya and Toramana, princes of tle 18&h generation after Mihirakula of the royal dyansty of Kashmir: In time, on the death of Pravarasend Hiranya the elder of the two became the Toramana functioned a8 Yuvcraja or Crown prince and attended to part of tl.e task of the administration of the kingdom: For gererations, thle image of a female deity 'Bala' had been inscribed on the coing of the realm. 'Baala' was the special ckosen deity of the royal family of Kashmir: Toramana withdrew from circulation the coing bearing the image of the diety sBaala' and reminled them with his own image ingtead end introduced the 23) ie., by by king king: 90 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR ne W coins into the currency. The caine to know of this fre:k, indulged in hy tl1o Crown- prince withont his ganction took offence and objection to the innovation and Toramana in prison. The wife of Toranana Was algo living with the prince, with the permigsion of the In) courge of time she Wzs confined and for ihc confinement she wa,a sent: by Toramana secretly to 2 potter in wom he had espocial CO1 fidence. There, in the: poltor s house, the princes was deli- vered of 2 male child wko was named aftor his erandfather, (Pravar) ~ Sena II' . Toramana later died in the prigon: King Hiranya also died childless in A. D. 14. Mean-while Pravaragena II, {he son of Toramana had sburled with his mother on a tour to the sacred places of pilgrimage: So there was no king on the throne 01 3 suitablo prince with any claim to be placed on tho throne_ Vikramaditya king of Ujjnin had established him- sclf the acknowledged Emperor of Bharat that timo. To avoid the danger of anarchy, the ministers of the kingdom of Kashmir sent 17p 2 petition to him to nominale suitable ruler for thoir gtate: sEmperor Vikramaditya" nominated Mathrugupt?, a distingmisl ed poet in his court, also known for his adminis'ralive ialent, and gent him to rvle oveI Kashnir in A. D: 14. This i8 the dotailed account of the episode of Tor- mnna; in 1k0 firsl 3 Tarang: $ of Kalhana' s Hislory of Kashmir. This part (f history, aS t],e other parts, was evidently based on valid sourccs, #S professed by Kalhana in the prefatory verses I- 8, 9, 10 of Kalhana, describing the principle8 procedure 11e clo8e 10 idopl for his higtory. From the account king put king: by and HISTORY Of KASHMIR in Kalhana' 8 history, Hiranya and Toramana jointly administered the country, Keshmir, from B. C. 16 to A. D. 14. Vikramarka nominated & for Kashmir, in his capacity as suzerain, being the Emperor of Bharat Mihirakula and Toramana werc both Kshatriyas and princes of the family of Kashmir: Vikramaditya was Emperor of Bherat Alleging that Kalhana tampered with his cuthorities in these portions the Europan Orientalis:s have rejected just these three Tarangas, which contain such important historical facts, a8 invalid for higtorical p.rposes: They profess to write the history of Kashmir relying on Kalhana's text from the 4th Taranga onwards: They have been indulging in the false propaganda that Vikramarka of the lst century A. D., is not a his- torical pereonage at all, and the Saka named after him was not founded by any such Emperor: This migchief hes not been discovered by our Indian historians. Mihirakula and Toramana were Kshatriya princes of Kaghmir in Bharat: They were not Hunas O foreigners: Hunas nover ruled over any part of Bharat. Vikramaditya ruled a8 Emperor of Bhcrat; from B. 0. 82 to A: D: 19. The his tory f Kashmir concocted by Dr: Buhler and Stein is & heap of falsehoods and miserepresenta- tiong. We have to discard them and for a true history of Kashmir, rely entirely on Kalhana duly edited. The Story of Ihe coing with the image of Toramana 'Emperor Vikramaditya' who had nominated Matrugupta a8 the of Kashmir; pagged away at the ripe old age of 120 years in A. D 19 at king royal yet king 92 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR Tjjein. Filled with; grief at the demise of his friondl an(l patron, M::trugupta ronounccd the throne of Kashmir; Look holy orders, went to Benaras and died thcre. By this time Pravarasena II son of Toramana had returned Lo Kashmir, with his mother, after compleling the LO7r of pilgrimege to all the sacred shrincs in tho country. The ministers of the staie thereforo crowned him at once and he proved 33 very ablc monarch. Ho oven conquered the whole of thc Indo-;gcAic valley, cen tral India and western India rnnledl a8 2 mighty over &ll ihe regions, according to Kalhana. Chroughort the vast dominions orer which he exercieed power, the coins hccring Iho image of his father were curront. So a9 they wore current coin in I80 in Weslern and Contral Tndia many of then have been discovered in tho regions in modern times: Bni Mihirakula Toramana were not Hunas, no Furia ever ruledl ovcr this part of India. The hearsav reports that & Chinego traveller in India in the Zth contury A. D, had met Mihirakula could nol Io true. How couldl tho Chinese traveller of the 7th centvry A= D. meot; Mihirakula who belonged to 704-634 B. C ? Such falso statenents must havc loen deliherate]y interpolated by Dr: Beal and other Evropoan Orientalist8 in the Chinege manuseripts with the intention of gaini- support for their falee history of ancient Bharat. That i8 they have heen carrying on incegsent propaganda that the indigenous hie: torical wri- like the Purana8, Kashmir Nepal histories elc., were not; reliable and tho accounts of foreign travellere have to be treated a8 authoritative evidence forxthe history of ancient king anc king and ng why, and tings HISTORY OF KASHMIR 93 Bharat. But the gtatements alleged to be found in the writings of foreigners; which contradict tho gtatomente in ouI indigenous higtorical writinga like histories of Kashmir and Nepal, Magadha, Epicg and the Puranas, should be taken for recent inlerpolations and rejected and not held autho- ritative evidence. 24) AGE OF THE MARABHARATA WAR TOPIC XV. HISTORY OF NEPAL Confusion of tho Eras ; Misinlerprelalions of inscriptions Among the Royal (lynasties of Nepal, the fifth wag 2 Solar Dynasty: There are 31 kings in the list of Kings of this dyntsty. Of ihem the 27th is Sivadeva Varma. It i8 stated in ihe History of Nepal that this Sivadeva Varma was corwned in Kali 2764. Three inacrintions of his have been discovered Ncs: 12, 13, 14 of the Nepal inscriptions: In the inscription No 12, tl1e coronation of Sivadeva Varma is daledl the year 119 of the Sri Harsha Era 457 B. () Kali 2764 or Sri Harsha 119 corresponds to B.C. 338. There i8 thus agreenent with regard to this date between the history of Nepal this ingcription: But the European Orientalisis, alleg- ing that the date on the Kali Era in the hislory of Nepal is wrong; and that the Sri Harsha Saka (B.C: 457) of the ingcription is D 'suppoged Srj Harsha Siladitya Era commencing in A. D 606, agsign the coronation of Sivadeva Varma to A: D. 606 + 119 A. D. 725, and thns bringing for_ ward the coronation of Sivadcva Varma from B.O. 338 to A.D: 725, reduce the antiquity of the entire history of Nepal 1063 years, and by further reducing the periodg of the reigng of kinge wherever possible, on the whole reduce the king (of and by by the HISTORY OF NEPAL 95 antiquity of the Chronology of the history of Nepal, a8 they did with the Chronology of the history of Kashmir and Magadha by 1200 years: The last of the Solar dynasty is Viswa - deva Varma. He ruled over Nepal from Kali 2950 to 3001. He had no male issue. He gave his only daughter in marriage to Amgumantha of the Thakore dynasty who succeeded Viswadeva Varma to the throne of Nepal ruled over the country froi Kali 3001 to 3069 01 B. @. 101 7 33 B. O. He belongs to the sixth dynasty, (the Thakore dynasty) and the sixth after Sivadeva Varma who was crowned in B: C. 338 and he was crowned 237 years subgequently in B: @. 101. During his reign, in Kali 3045 01 B. O. 57, according to the Nepala Raja Vamsavali, or indigenous history of Nepal, Emperor Vikramaditya of Ujjain visited Nepal, and founded the Vikrama Era in 58-57 B. 0, and the inauguration of the new Era was cele- brated there. (Vide Indian Antiquary Vol. XIII P. 4l1 ff). But Dr. Buhler, one of the European Orienta- lists who hold that there wag no such Emperor Vikramaditya, he is only fictitioug not a his- torical pergonage; in order to ignore the reference to the visit of Vikramaditya to Nepal in the history of Nepal, introduces an account of the Chinese traveller in this connection and alleges that he learnt in response to an enquiry made by him, fron his friend Dr: Beal who had made 2 study of the Ohinese language and the Chinese manuscripts, that according to the Ohinege man- scripts of the record of the travels in India of king and king and 96 TKE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR Heuntsang he visited Nepal in A: D. 637, and that he wag then Iold there that at the very time Or & short time previously there was a powerful thore of the nane Amsumantha or 'Amshu- famo' in Ohinege of the manugcript: He therefore infers the Amsumanta, King of Nepal must have prohably passed away & little previous to the visit of Heuntsang in A. D 637 Or just at the time, and We may date the time of Amsumanta in A. D. 637 and describes the statement in the Nopala Raja Vamgavali that Amgumantha wag crownedl in 101 B. @. 28 2 falge statement duo to 3 dlesiro on the part of the anthor of the work to increase the antiquity of the history of his counlry: Thus he manoeuvred (Dr: Buhler) to push forward the time of king Amgumantha of B. C. 1Ol to A. D. 637, and denies the historicity of Emperor Vikrama- of Ujjain who visited Nepal during the reign of thig Amgumantha in B. C. 57, and dlis_ credits altogether the part of the Nepala Raja Vamgavali which mentiong these events and dates: In the inloxication of ihe apparent success he was able t0 achiovo in his nefarious attempt Dr. Buhler has committed himgelf to several absurd and mutually inconsistent chronological determina- tion8, unaware that he wa8 disprooving his own theory- He has pushed forward the date of the coronation of Sivadeva Varma from B. C. 338 to A_ D. 725. He has al80 fixod the time of the coronation of Amgumantha, the of tho sixth generation after him, which should come off 237 years afterwards ie. ` according to his own deter- nination of the date of Sivadeva Varma' 8 COIO- king ditya king HiSTORY OF NEPAL 97 nation in A. D,, 725, in A. D 962, strangely in A D 637 . Is it not absurd and self contradic- tory ?_ Evidently he resorted to this absurd deter- mination to lend plausibility to the interpolation he had managed 'to effect, through his friend Dr: Beal, in the Chinese manuscript of the account of Heuntsang' s travels and to enhance its vakue a8 evidence for the his'ory of Bharat ; and he relied confidently upon the uncritical blind faith of Indian historical scholars; in the voracity and wisdom of the European Orientaliets ; for their swallowing the mutua] inconsislency in his own statements. As he anticipated, though 2 century has pasged since, our Indian historical scholars continue to repeat his inconsistent statements Parrot-like a8 though they were sacred textg and to believe implicitly that our own indigenous historical writings are all unreliable without realising Or even suspecting the mischief perpe- trated by thege European Orientalists: It i8 to render it pogsible and convenient to attempt such migchief and to distort the truth and reduce the antiquity of the history of Bharat the con- coction of false and baseless theories of their own. That they have been proclaiming incessantly that the accounis of the foreign travellers ar0 more respectable authorities for the recon- struction of our ancient history than the indige- nous historical writing and interpolating absurd gtatements in them to show our indigenous 25) by 98 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR higtories to be nreliahle: It is clear; with this dig- cussion of the mischief attempted in connection with the history of Nepal , that the alleged writings of Heuntsang, the opinions of Dr. Beal, the hie- tory of Nepal Dr: Buhler and other writings of the European Orientalists are all unreliable. Almost all the chronological determinations in the 8o-called modern histories of ancient Bharat a1B wrong and no true history of ancient Bharat can be reconstructed unless we proceed on the basis of the material avilable in our Purana8 and start with the Mahabharata War of B. @. 3138 a8 the foundation for our chronology. by AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR TOPIC e XVI HISTORICITY OF VIKRAMADITYA The Emperor Vikramaditya wag born to Gandharvasena Maharaja in B. C. 101 and belonge to the Panwar dynasty. He was crowned king at Ujjain in B. 0. 82 when he was 19 years of age. He reigned for 2 full century (a hundred years) and pagged away at Ujjain in A. D., 19. He conquered the whole of Bharat and reduced all the kings to the status of tributary princeg under his suzeraeinty and ruled a8 Emperor: (His history is given in detail according to the account in the Bhavighya Mahapurana; by this author in chapter VII of his 'Ohronology of Ancient Hindu History pt I). It i8 found recorded in the history of Nepal that he marched with his armieg into Nep" in B. 0,, 57, incorporated that kingdom, (the Nc thern-mogt in Bharat) al80 into his Empire, an:, having thus completed hig conquest of the whole of Bharat, founded a new Era after him there in Nepal in Kali 3045-44 OI B 0. 57. (Vide Indian Antiquary Vol XIII; p: 411 ff): Even in the history of the kingdom of Magadha there is 2 detailed account of the kingg of the Agni dynasties in the Bhavishya Purana in connection with the four royal dynasties of Pramara, Chayahani, or Tomara, Sukla or Ohalukya, Pralihara 01 Parihara, that ruled over the conntry after the kings of the Gupta dyanasty: 100 THIE AGE OF: TE MAHABHARATA WAR Il is furthor slaled there that tho eighth king" of the Pramara dynasty, Vikramaditya con- querd the Gupta kingdon of Magadha algo and hecaine the Emperor of Bharat: But the Euro- pean Orientalists have ignored this portion of the text and denied any place to the kings of all the Agni dynasties in their histories of Bharat: Thercafler, the l1th of the sm0 dyna - Salivahana defeated the Sakas, the foreign invaders and founded another Era after his OwII name in Kali 3179 or A. 78 accordirg Lo the Bhavishya Purana. The Zlst king of the 83me Pramara dyansty i8 Bhoja of the glorious literary tradition. In the battle which took place in A. D, 1193 betwcen Prithviraj, of the Tomara dynasty, king of Delhi and Mahammad Ghori, tho of all these four Agni dynasties (known other- wise 98 Brahma-Kshatras) took part in the fight to prBSOIVO the freedom of the country and logt their livea. The history of all thege kings of all these dynasties has been suppressed. There is ample evidence of the historicity of Emporor Vikra- maditya in the indigenous hislorieg of Magadha, in Jyolirvidubharana, in Jyotigha Phala Rainamal&, in the Bhashya of (or commentary) the Satapalha Brahmana. (Vide the Authors fChronology of Kashmir History Recongtructed, from 173 to 222 Pages Ed. 1956.) The writinge of the European Orientalists who inulge in the propaganda that this famoug Emperor of India of illustrious tradition Was only a fictitious personage, that his equally famoug descendent; who also became an Emperor king stv D king king HISTORICITY OF VIKRAMADITYA 101 and founded his own Era, Salivahana was algo 2 fictitioug personase, ar0 all falge propagandist histories. Our Indien Astronomers prepare their Almanacs (Nawive Annual Calendars) from year Lo year reckoning from 830 Commencement of Kali Ynga till to this date. These Almanacs are in a8e throughout the country in all all the Skates. AlI the Hindus specify this time according to the Kali Saka whon they begin the traditional rites prescribod for them. A. D:, 1959 English Calendar year will be 5060 Kaliyuga and 2015-16 Vikrama Saka and 1881 Salivahana Sekc . If from Kali Saka, the Vikrana Saka 2016 years deducted, we get (5060 2016) 3044 Kali Saka or 57 B. C., which will be the starting point of Vikroma Saka. Similerly if we deduct 1881 yearg of Salivahana Saka from Kali Saka 5060 Wo (5060 1881) 3179 Kali Saka or A. D: 78 which will be the atarting point of Salivahana Saka. This proof i8 enough to show that are not fictitious porsonages. In Siddhanta Siromani" (Kalamanadhyay ` , 28 verge) written by hinself Bhaskaracharya, while discussing the calculation of time prevelent dvring his period spoke about Vikrama &rd Kai Saka a8 given helow. 25) get they 102 TrIE AGE OF THIE MAHABHIARATA WAR 6 1} jaTfistWia (8 ?3:) faztitma #taart: This 12Cilns s Ih 3179 yCabrs in Kaliyuga wil] be the ond of Vikr:a Saka" The beginning of Vikrama Saka will bu Kali 34)44 yOars Or 57 I3. a1] Ulle eml of Vikrma Era will be tlo beginning of Sal i valhana Saka When 2 neW Era heging the previons Trn is considered to com8 to a closo. So 31'79 Kali will he 78 A. D, and this is the beginning of Salivahana Saka. If WC dedluct fron Kali 3179 the Vikrama Saka 3044, we 2 period of 135 yoars: 'Thercforc, this calculation, beyond douht; confirms the truth of the existonce of Vikramsdiiya in 57 B. andl the starling of his Era, Loget 0'T with the living of Salivahana in 78 A. D., { @cl tho eslablishing of his Saka: Salivahana Wala 1ho great; Grard son of Vikramarka. So it is evidloni; {h:t Vikramaditya was born in Kali 3001 YA?T O1' 101 B. C,, his Coronation Iook place in Kali 3020 ycar or 82 B. C, and the Vikrama Saka Wzs foundod in 3044 Kili or 57 B. 0. He dleclicelions of works in Kali 3068 (33 B. 0,,) in Kali 3114 (13 A. D. from Kalidasn and others: Ho medo Mnlrngnpta, of Kashmir jn Kali 3115 voar or 14 A. D, Vikramaditya wcnt to hoavon in Kali 3120 year 01 19 A. D. Inlispuahlo sladcmonls which prov( the authenticity and Historicity of Emporor Vikrama- ditya will Ise pullikod shortly. C. get C. got and king AGE OF THE MARABHARATa WAR TOPIC XVII. SiR WILLIAM JONES, PROF. MAX L MULLER AND MR TrOYer It was Sir William Jones that first laid the foundations in A. D., 1774 for the Modern (false) history of ancient Bharat: He had travelled in central Asia and there secured possession of & documont known &s the 'Dabistan Paper' in Bactria, containing a list of the king8 of the Royal Dynasties of Bactria They are all Hindu kings The document shows that previous to the conquests of Alexander in 327 B. C., 153 kings of the dynasty had ruled over Bactria for over 6000 years: So it turned out that the history of the cul ture and civilisa- tion of Bharat has been in existence for over 6000 years before Alexandcr and for 2100 years after Alexander up to the Gime of Sir William Jones, altogether for 8100 yea18, 'The discovery really filled him with astonishment There? fFler he propoged to roconstruct the history of Ancient Bhara } and for that purpose proceeded to Calcutt? and there met Pandit Radhakant and asked for information regarding dynastic lists of kings of Bhaat if any such wore available in Ou1 Puranag. The Pandit gave him the lists of the Royal dynasties in the Srimad- bhagavata. Jones took them down in writing and published the same. (Vide Jone'$ Works, Vol. IV On the Chronology of tlio Hindus) 104 THE AGE OF THE MAMABHARATA WAR Pandit Radhakenta slarked with tho tile of the Mahah}crw: W;2' in B. G. 3130 and gave the lisls of kings cf 6h10 Royal dynaslies of Magadha from that Lime. The first dynasty #hat ruled in Magadha aflcr the Malabharta WVar was th1e Bar :adrad'# st; 3. kit-s 0f ~he dynasty rumbered 22. 'hcv rnled in ol1 for 3 thousand yeara. Then U: 1 radyola dynasty was the next t0 occupY tk.e zhrone. 'The fivo kings of this dynastv ruled for 138 yenr3 in all, thc third waS the Sisnag:l dynssty (10) kings which remained in power for 360 years, the fourth was tho Nanda dynas'y (9 kings 0,9 two goncrations) which held powor only for 100 ycar8. Then 28 the fifth dynasty the Maurv.s scizedl tho throne anc came into powe. Al thia inform;:Lion Sir Willian Joneg gathercd from the IShagavta. In the game manner he learned, noted and published that the sixth, thie Srngal dynasty, tl.e sevanth the Kaanva and #l1c eighth tho Andhrzl dynasty i7led in Magadha in succossion and tho last king of the Andhra dynasky was Chandralija or Chandra Sri: He diedl in B. C. 452. Th1ns fa' he could proceed with tho information #vailalslo in the Bhagavata: The succ(oding royal dynastios were not &vailablo Lo him with Bhagavatet: It didl not occur to hin that he might refer t0 tho other Puranas: After tho closo of tho rulo of the Andhra dynasty, Aloxander invaded India il) B 326. 'lhis wag the history of ancicnt Bharat which he cold learn. He loarnt from Pandit Ralhakaist and rocorded in his higlory the dletails of tho poriods of the govcrabl kings anl of thie C, SIR WILLIAM JONES. PROF. MAX MULLER_ 105 different royal dynasties beginning with the advent of Kali in B. C. 3102. But he could not relish the fact of siach great antiquity of the history of Bharat, refused to recognise the histori" cal truali of 620 Barhsdredha dynesty, alleging that it Wabs perhaps concocted by the Brahmins to increase the antiquity of the hisiory of their connlry, rejected the 22 kings of the Barhadradha dynasty and their period of 1000 years occupied by their reigns began his history of Bharat with the pradyota dynasty of about B. @. 2000. He could 8e8 no other way then of reducing the antiquity of the history of Bharat: He Writes: - sOn the whole WO may safely close the most authentic system of Hindu chronology, that I have been able to procure, with the death of Chandrabija. Should any further information be attainable, WB shall, perhaps, in due time attain it either from books or inscriptions in the San- skrit language, but from the materials with which WB are at present supplied, We may establish a8 indubitable the two following propositions; that the first ages of the Hindus a10 chiefly mytho- logical, whether their mythology was founded on the dark enigmas of their Astronomers, or on the heroic fictions of their poets and that the fourth, Or higtorical age cannot be carreid furtlher back that about two thougand years before Christ; 6( Vide, Jones works, Vol: IV, pp. 42 to 46; 1 and 2 and p: 47, 52). 27) and 106 THE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR Subsequently, #fter consultalions with thie then Governol (eneral of India Warron Hast- ings, he gradually- veererl round to thc view thal it was not plausihle to reject uhe enire Barhadra - dha dynasty of Mngadha: and it WZ8 more plausi - ble to idontify wrona] " the condemporary in Magadha, of Alexander the Great "8 Maurya Chandragupta instead of (upka Chanlragnpla who knew WaS thc Tca condomporary of Alexander and Lh78 rctiuco the (hrowology of the history of Magadha h 1200 Te:re. Fver since, he and other Orientalists of k.is school of thought, had been sugs6'xling it in #hweir CSS.TS contributed to the Asiatic Researahies a1'] other journa]s. After such shy hut; persistent prOp: ganda in the journals for ngarlv eighty VCarS, Joncs and his followers, it was Max Muller who ;k it up and gave 3 definito shape anl Ghc sl: mp of his authority to the thcory. PROF. MAX MULLER Prof. Max - Muller had] snpporka d 42 0 hcory of the Central Asian Origin of 1ho Aryans the theory that they hd migrated fron Con !ral Asia and invaded India: Lateron, aflcr attcmpting 2 translation of the Rig-Ved" inlo kis OW ltngu- agF, thus gnining first-handl knowledgc, i0 sone exlent, of the litorature of IShaat, he renounced his Central Asian theory anl (1m28 round to the view that the Aryans wcre the native inhabitante of the region rourd the they h ardl and SHR WILLIAM JONES PROF. MAX MULLER; 107 Ganges, the Europeans were all descended from them, and it w2s {h0 hirth place of the entire human race. scWhat have we inharited fron the dark dwellers on the Indus and the Gangcs 2 Their historical records extend in sone respectss S0 far beyond sll other records and have been preserved to u8 in guch perfect and such legible documents, than we Gan learn fron them lessons which TFe Gan learn nowhere else." 66 What then is it that gives to Sanskrit its claim on our attontion and its supreme impor- tance in the eyes of tho historians ? First of all its antiquity for we know Sanskrit at an earlier period than {"'10 Greek: But; what i8 far more important than its mere chronological antiquity in the antiqaie state of preservation, in which that Aryan language has been handed down 9 1 to 78. Again hie say8 :- "As Sankrit stepped into the midst of these langnages (Viz. Greok; Latins Gothic Anglo-saxon, Celtic, Slavonic 0tc.,) there cane light and wa1m _h and mutual recognition: They a]l ceased {o be strangers and each fell of its own accord into ils right place. Sanskrit was the eldest sister of Uhem all and could tell of many things which the other members of thc family had quite forgotten:' 66 All I wish to impress on you by way of introduction that; the result of gcience of language, which without the aid of Sanskrit, would never have been obtained, from the osgential elenents 103 TXE AGE OF THE MAHABMIARATA WAR of we call 3 liheral, that is, 2 historical educ?- tion _ an education which will enahle a nan to clo what {he French cnl] 8, (ri-net; that 'to find his East;' 9 shis {1o F::s ,' 9 and thus to deternine his real place in the wor]dl" 6WVe all comc from the East-all that WO Value most has come to 78 from thc Fast" (Max- Muller' 8, sIndia What can it teach pp. 21 to 32 Ed. 1883). s1o fathom ancient India, all knowledlgo acquired in Europe avails naught, tbo Siudy must recommence 3,8 the infant learns to read, and the harvest i8 too distant for lnkewarm energies"_ sThen you will have heen inidiatecl, #nd India, will apper to you the mothor of human rac0 __ the cradle of all our traditiong. The Hindu omigration rendered the same service to Egypt, do Persia, Judia, Greece and Rome is What 17 I suppose to dononstrate. (Ibid. p. 171 Max Muller has professed grcat rogpoct for #he culturo and wisdom of Bharat Ho is well- known' 2S an admirer and friend of Bharat. Such 2 regpectahle Seholar wag induced presure brought to bear on him by the Orientalisl8, to exprses it 28 his opinion in A. D, 1859 that Ohandragnpta of the Maurya dynasly waa the contemporary in India of Alexander (the Great, and thub to fix the foundationg for their faleo is, 7s" by SR WILLIAM JONES PROF . MAX MULLER_ 109 history of ancient Bhar :t. Till then the European Orientalists wer8 basing their historical writings and chronological determinationg relating to the his'ory of ancient Bharat on the contemporaneity of Alexander and Chandragupta Maurya a8 sugges- -ted in the articles in the journalg but thereafter were openly assuming the guggegted theory a8 & proved fact on the strength of the declara- -tion by Max - Muller in his higtory of Sanskrit Literature. But Max Muller hag expregsed hig opinion, carefully without keeping back the circumastances and motives with which he wag obli- to make the declaration, 80 that it is pogsible for Indian higtoriang, if only they care, to detect the mischief and remedy it even from the wording of his own declaration: He gays sThe history of India can be connected with that of Greece its chronology be reduced to its proper limits _ (Vide History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature Prof. Max Muller 1859 Edo , Pages 3-8 and Allahabad Edn: pp. 141-143). Perhaps Max ~ Muller hoped that Indian historical gcholarg would in course of time digcover; the motive of the identification rectify the deliberation reduction of the antiquity of their ancient history and hinted at it indirectly: But ou1 higtorical scholars have not taken the hint S0 far. MR: M; TROYER He had translated the text of Kalhana's Rajatarangini into English. He published objection to the declaration by Max Muller 28) they ged and by his 110 THE AGE OF TME MAHABHARATA WAR supporaing Glic thoor of #h:e contcmporaneidy of Alexondcr M:ara (handr:#gzpdak He deelared that the conl : por; of AJczlcr 1izs not Chand1agupka of ihc Mourya dynasty Iut onlv Chandragupta cf the Gupla dynasly of Magadha and sont his opinion in writing t0 prof. Max- Muller: Olhermen of integrity among #he Euro - pean Orientalists, hadl #lso writton to prof: Max-Muller pointing out his error. But since he had knowingly through pressure bronght t0 hoar on him, expressed his erroneous opinion. So he did not withdraw his opinion, bnt unablo t0 advance any pronf Or authority in support of his vieW, wrote ; "Although other scholars and parti- cul- Mr. Troyer in his edilion of tl1c Raja- tarangini, have raised ohjections, T170 shall 806 that the evidence in favour of identity of (l:'n- dragupta and Sandrocyptus ig such 18 to admit of no reasonable doubt (Vide Hislory of Ancicnt; Sanskrit Literature pps 3-8 of 1859 Edn; p4, 243 of Allahabad Edn-,). Slampel with the anthority ot Ulio groat scholar, Mnx = Muller; this falge thoory has hcen working havoc with ihe history of an(iet; Bharat: It hats heen rosponsihle for caling doubls O1I cvery historicl evend, i1 Lhe hiatory of Bharat Since it i8 contr:bry to th1o ontiro litorcturo Qf Bharat il has (OITUpkcl Uh1e CIlire hislory of anciont Bharat. "Iho dlifference Iset- ween the time of Maurya Ohandregupta 1534 B. G. and Gupla Chndragupta B. @. 327 ix noarly 1207 years. Tho time of the Mahabarala wal' of ana} arly SiR WILLIAM JONES, PROF. MAX MULLER__ 111 B. C. 3138 is pushed forward thereby to B. 0 1931. With reg?rd L0 everv imporiant Cbronolo- gica] determination i0 differen3e 3woo1l tle erroneous determinaticn cf the E-ropeen Oris-ta- lis:s and the true determination according" to the hislorical writings in indigenous literature of the country turng out to be just about 1200 yearg Max 4 Muller was not able Lo show any authority 0r argunent against the objections of Mr: Troyer and oihers of his way of thought The authority of the writings of the Chinege traveller; discovered and manipulated later; was not available to him at that time, perhaps the note of repentence for the mischief with which he had corporated ig evident in thege words of the proffessor : "No nation has in this respect been more unjus tly treated than the Indian: Not only have general conclusiong been drawn from the most scanty materialg but the nost questionable and spurious authorities have been employed without the least historical investiga- 0 tion. (Quoted from Max ~ Muller's writings Mr;. Krishnamachariar in his History of Olassical Sanskrit Literature;' Introduction pp. LXXXIV and LXXXV) by AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR TOPIC ~ 1VIll TRUE CHRONOLOGY Of ANCIENT HISTORY OF BHARAT There is 212 accOIn & of the Chronology according to the Kaliyuga Raja Vrittanta, a Purana in which all the information availahle in al1 the Puranas hag been collated and reconciled: For details refer to this author' s 1 Ancient Hindu Histor Pt. I. ". 1. The time of the Mahahharata War ~ 36 years before Kali which commenced in B. C. 3102. No. of kings Vo: of .cr reigned rcigned 1, The Barhadradha dynasty 22 kings 1006 yearA: 2. The Pradyota dynasty 5 93 138 3. The Sisunaga dynasty 10 360 4. The Nanda dynasty 2 100 5. The Maurya dynasty 12 316 6. The Sunga dynasly 10 300 7. Kanwn dynasty 4 85 8. The Andhra dynasky 32 506 97 2811 years. TRUE CHRONOLOGY OF THE 113 B F. 97 2811 years From the Mahabharata War to the end of the Andhra dynasty till 3138 2811 327 B. 0. 327 B. @. 9_ Andhra . Bhritya or Gupta dynasty 245 82 9 ) 10. Panwar dynasty. No. 8of this dynasty is Emperor Vikrana who founded the Vikrama Era his dynasty. 24 1275 1193 A. D_ 128 4331 1193 A. D In the year 1l93 A, D. al1 the four princes of the four Agni Dynasties, fighting on the side of Prithwiraj against Md. Ghori, of Delhi who wag one of them, and a prince of the Tomara dynasty, died on the battle field 3 death always coveted by heroes in this land of Bharat: They died an honourable death fighting in defence of the indepondence of their country. 3. Fron The time of the Mahabharata War of B: @. 3138 down to end of the Andhra Dynasty of Magadha 327 B. @. 2811 years Kings of the Gupta dynasty 245 years Kings of the Panwar dynasty 1275 years Tota] 4331 years 29) king 114 THE ASE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR For & :n1a} periol of 4331 )cars Hindu had reigned #8 Empcrors over Lhe whole of Bharat from Mahalharela War 3138 B. C Battle of ThancsWar 1193 A. D. Fotal 4331 Tcars. 3. Tho reckoning in tle 'tr:bzn::$ based 01 1h10 movement of tho Constellation of thc Scven Sages From the timo of the Nahahlar:d; War when thc Seven Sages were in Magha to the Gime of Mahapadnia Nanda 1504 yQIS: Mahapadma Nanda to the time of the Andhras- when Dass into Ghc 244h1 star after Maghal 801 2305 The period of the rulo of the Andhra Dynasty 506 To the end of the Andhra dynasty or the beginning of the Gupta dynasty. 2811 99 4. From {hlo {imne of Ghe Mahabharaka War tlc time of the of the reign of the 24th of tho Andhra dynasty tho Soven Sagns complelo 2 full cycle of 27 stars and roach Magha again: 2705 yearg kings they hy_ endl king TRUE CHRONOLOGY OF THE 115 B F. 2705 years The period of tho rule of the remaining" kings of the Andhra dynasty fzom the 25th 106 Fron the Mahabharata War to the end of the Andhra dynasty 2811 years Then the period of the reigns of the Guptas 245 Panwar Dynasty or Brahma Kahatra Dynasty 1275 4331 years: The total period of the rule of 128 Hindu kings from the time of the Mahabharata War is 4331 years. Average lengbh of the reign of each is 34 years: The Mahabharata, the Puranas, the Astronomical treatises of the country, the Native Oalendars tradition indigenous hislorical writings like the histories of Magadha, Kashmir and Nepal the entire ancient literature of Bharat, unanimously declare the time of the Mahabharata War to be 36 years before Kali or 3138 B. @. From the year of the Malabharata War or the year l of the Yudhishti1a Era, the period of the rule of the Hindu kings: 4331 yeare king king and 116 THIE AGE OF THE MAHABHARATA WAR B F. 4381 years The latcr period during wbich 8hlo Muhammadan; the Maharashtias and Siks the English rulecl OveI the country ie from 4, D 1193 1947 whon India attained Iudejvenlonce 7;3 Since the attainmnb of Indepon: dence on 15kh Augusk 1947 up do 1959 A. D 12 9 > 5046 yoars 5096 Yudhishtira Era=506O Kali Era=l9s9A,D SO, THE TIME OF' THE MATABHARA TA WAR IS KAIHI 5096 Vt 1959 A, D) = 3138 B. C. and TRUE CHRONOLOGY OF THE 117 CONCLUSION 2- From what has been stated in Melshar` Puranas, Atronomical books, Ingcriptiong, history of Magadha as detailed in Puranas now styled a8 Indian History, Kashmir and Nepal historieg, movement of Saptershimandala, the periods over which different dynasties of kings ruled as described in Puranas, history of Vikramaditya and Ancient Hindu History, it has been proved that the Maha - bharata War was 3138 B. 0. This has al8o been confirmed by the evidence obtained from inscrip- tions: Amongst these ingcriptions, thie Aihole ingcription up by Pualakesin the second in 634 A. has been universally accepted ag Gospel truth by all higtoriang. This inscription clearly points out without any ambiguity that the Bharata War was is 3138 B @. It is therefore confirmed beyond doubt all the above mentioned proofs that the Mahabharata War was i8 3138 B. @. I Therfore, appeal to our Indian historians to study the texts of our indigenous historical writings in the originale, ascertain truth, reject the falge and fantastic higtories of Ancient Bharat concocted the European Orientalists and attempt a reconstruction of the true higtory of Ancient Bharat. J A I B HA R A T 30) put Ds by by E R R A T A Page Line Roall For VII 2 Archaeology Arelaelogy ViII 28 thc Inc X 21 hislorical hisoricn] 12 18 cOnmencemel C0MG'Il(0 [H 5L 14 12 Saptarshimana Sanl rshimanat 20 I9 Sraayenav:l? Sr aonavaa 22 26 M8s W $ 23 17 strcomical As ronomica[ 33 5 Ttya 7F4t 39 22 Wis T " 4 40 12 #Ild #1d 52 27 othre robes ochre vohes 60 17 village villoge 62, 12 Troyer '[rayor 64 19 mention menton 66 10 position positisn 66 12 GOUn (OIZ 67 3 school schoal 70 15 ceninry eciur 70 24 thc tho 77 18 dcliherte dlelihorako and 8; 13 erlier caricr 88 8 fow fa w 107 22 Cothic, Gothic inl Research in Indian History Bharata Charitra Bhaskara s Vimarsakagresara" PANDIT KOTA VENKATACHELAM of Vijayaweda published the following bookg BOOKS IN ENGLISEL 1. The Plot in Iridian Chronology 2. Chronology of Nepal History Reconslrucled 3. Chronology of Kashmir History Reconstructed 4. The Historicity of Vikramaditya & Salivahana 5. of Buddha, Milinda, Amtiyoka Yuga Purana 6. Ohronology of Ancient Hindu Hislory part i 7 9} 93 part II (Archaeological Evidence Misused) BOOKS IN TELUGU 1_ Bharateeya Sakamulu 2. Guptarajulevaru ? 3 Agnivamsapurajulu 4. Aryula Dhruvanivasa Khandanam 5. Kaliyuga Raja Vansamulu 6. Andhrula Puttu Poorvottaramulu and Jambu Dweepam For' Copies 61646 Dr: K. N. SASTRY Ananda Ayurvedic Drug Research Institute & Pharmacy A D RI P s Kotavari Buildings, Besant Road, (andhinagar, VIJAYAWADA 3 520 003. (EOUTH INDIA ) By Age "Bharata Charitra Bhaskara" PANDIT KOTA VENKATACHELAMS Other TBLTt hnaopxiatosz Books L BOOKS In TEI.UGU : 1. Adwaitabodhini 2 Nirvichara Jeovanam 2 Parts 3. Abhasa Christhavan) 4. Brahmanda Srishti Vijnanam 5. Kalisaka Vijnanam Part 1 6. 35 Part 2 7. Part 3 8. Agokuni Kalamu BOOKS IN ENGLISH : 1 Manava Srishti Vijnanan or The Cenesis of The Human Race 2 . Indian Eras #seed